Monetary Policy Report
APRIL 2017
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai
MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Contents
Chapter I: Macroeconomic Outlook 1
I.1 : The Outlook for Inflation 2
I.2 : The Outlook for Growth 6
I.3 : Balance of Risks 8
Box I.1: Inflation Forecast Combinations 4
Chapter II: Prices and Costs 10
II.1 : Consumer Prices 10
II.2 : Drivers of Inflation 11
II.3 : Costs 17
Box II.1: Anatomy of Food Deflation: Post Demonetisation 13
Chapter III: Demand and Output 19
III.1 : Aggregate Demand 19
III.2 : Aggregate Supply 25
III.3 : Output Gap 29
Box III.1: Investment Cycle in India: Some Insights from Wavelet Analysis 22
Chapter IV: Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions 31
IV.1 : Financial Markets 31
IV.2 : Monetary Policy Transmission 39
IV.3 : Liquidity Conditions and the Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy 41
Box IV.1: Stressed Assets, Capital Constraints and Supply of Credit 37
Box IV.2: Transmission to Small Savings Rates 41
Chapter V: External Environment 44
V.1 : Global Economic Conditions 44
V.2 : Commodity Prices and Global Inflation 47
V.3 : Monetary Policy Stance 49
V.4 : Global Financial Markets 49
Box V.1: Global Economic Activity and Trade: A New Normal? 46
iii
MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
ABBREVIATIONS
ADR - American Depository Receipt CPI-RL - Consumer Price Index for Rural
Labourers
AEs - Advanced Economies
CRAR - Capital to Risk-weighted Assets Ratio
AIFIs - All India Financial Institutions
CRR - Cash Reserve Ratio
AR - Autoregression
CSO - Central Statistics Office
ARIMA - Autoregressive Integrated Moving
Average DGCI&S - Directorate General of Commercial
Intelligence & Statistics
ARM - Additional Revenue Mobilisation
DISCOMs - Distribution Companies
BE - Budget Estimates
ECB - European Central Bank
BoJ - Bank of Japan
ECBs - External Commercial Borrowings
BSE - Bombay Stock Exchange
ECM - Error Correction Model
bps - Basis Points
EMDEs - Emerging Market and Developing
BVAR - Bayesian VAR
Economies
BVARX - Bayesian VARX
EMEs - Emerging Market Economies
CASA - Current Account and Saving Account
EU - European Union
CBLO - Collateralised Borrowing and Lending
Obligation FAO - Food and Agriculture Organisation
CDs - Certificates of Deposit FBs - Foreign Banks
CGA - Controller General of Accounts FCCB - Foreign Currency Convertible Bond
CGST - Central Goods and Services Tax FCNR - Foreign Currency Non-Resident
CI - Confidence Interval FDI - Foreign Direct Investment
CII - Confederation of Indian Industry FICCI - Federation of Indian Chamber of
Commerce and Industry
CLI - Composite Leading Indicator
FI - Financial Institution
CMBs - Cash Management Bills
FIMMDA - Fixed Income Money Markets and
CMIE - Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy
Derivatives Association
CPB - Central Planning Bureau
FIPB - Foreign Investment Promotion Board
CPs - Commercial Papers
FMCG - Fast Moving Consumer Goods
CPC - Central Pay Commission
FOMC - Federal Open Market Committee
CPI - Consumer Price Index
FPI - Foreign Portfolio Investment
CPI-AL - Consumer Price Index for Agricultural
FRBM - Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Labourers
Management
CPI-IW - Consumer Price Index for Industrial
FR - Fixed Rate
Workers
v
MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
FY - Financial Year IRF - Impulse Response Function
GARCH - Generalised Autoregressive Conditional ISM - Institute for Supply Management
Heteroscedasticity
JPC - Joint Plant Committee
GDP - Gross Domestic Product
LAF - Liquidity Adjustment Facility
GDR - Global Depository Receipt
LCR - Liquidity Coverage Ratio
GFD - Gross Fiscal Deficit
LIC - Life Insurance Corporation of India
GFCE - Government Final Consumption
LPG - Liquefied Petroleum Gas
Expenditure
M3 - Broad Money
GFCF - Gross Fixed Capital Formation
MA-SV - Moving Average Model with Stochastic
GFC - Global Financial Crisis Volatility
GoI - Government of India mb/d - Million Barrels Per Day
GMM - Generalised Method of Moments MCA - Ministry of Corporate Affairs
GNDI - Gross National Disposable Income MCLR - Marginal Cost of Funds Based Lending
Rate
GNPAs - Gross Non-Performing Assets
MGNREGA - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
G-Secs - Government Securities
Employment Guarantee Act
GSDP - Gross State Domestic Product
MOCI - Ministry of Commerce and Industry
GST - Goods and Services Tax
m-o-m - Month-on-Month
GVC - Global Value Chain
MPC - Monetary Policy Committee
GVA - Gross Value Added
MPR - Monetary Policy Report
H1 - First Half of the Year
MSP - Minimum Support Price
H2 - Second Half of the Year
MSCI - Morgan Stanley Capital
HRA - House Rent Allowance International
MSMEs - Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
ICRR - Incremental Cash Reserve Ratio
MSS - Market Stabilisation Scheme
IGARCH - Integrated Generalised Autoregressive
Conditional Heteroscedasticity MVK - Multivariate Kalman Filter
IGST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax NABARD - National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development
IIP - Index of Industrial Production
NBFCs - Non-Banking Financial Companies
IOCL - Indian Oil Corporation Limited
NBFCs-D - Deposit-taking NBFCs
IPO - Initial Public Offering
NBFCs-ND-SI - Systemically Important Non-deposit Taking
IMD - India Meteorological Department
NBFCs
IMF - International Monetary Fund
NCAER - National Council of Applied Economic
IND-AS - Indian Accounting Standard Research
INR - Indian Rupee NDTL - Net Demand and Time Liabilities
vi
MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
NDS-CALL - Negotiated Dealing System-Call RRBs - Regional Rural Banks
NEER - Nominal Effective Exchange Rate RW - Random Walk
NFC - Non-Food Credit SAAR - Seasonally Adjusted Annualised Rate
NIM - Net Interest Margin SAE - Second Advance Estimates
NOAA - National Oceanic and Atmospheric SBNs - Specified Bank Notes
Administration
SCBs - Scheduled Commercial Banks
Non-IT - Non-Information Technology
SDLs - State Development Loans
NPA - Non-performing Asset
SEBI - Securities and Exchange Board of India
NSDL - National Securities Depository Limited
SLR - Statutory Liquidity Ratio
OECD - Organisation for Economic Co-
SUT - Supply and Use Table
operation and Development
T-Bill - Treasury Bill
OMOs - Open Market Operations
TRAI - Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
OPEC - Organisation of the Petroleum
TVW - Time Varying Weights
Exporting Countries
TV-GDW - Time Varying Geometrically Backward
OROP - One Rank One Pension
Decaying Weights
PADO - Public Administration, Defence and
UDAY - Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana
Other Services
UK - United Kingdom
PCE - Partial Credit Enhancement
US - United States
PCE - Personal Consumption Expenditure
USD - US Dollar
PC - Phillips Curve
VAR - Vector Autoregression
PFCE - Private Final Consumption Expenditure
VR - Variable Rate
PMI - Purchasing Managers’ Index
VARX - Vector Autoregression Model with One
POL - Petroleum, Oil and Lubricant
Exogenous Variable
PPAC - Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell
WACR - Weighted Average Call Money Rate
PSBs - Public Sector Banks
WALR - Weighted Average Lending Rate
PVBs - Private Sector Banks
WADTDR - Weighted Average Domestic Term
q-o-q - Quarter-on-Quarter
Deposit Rate
RBI - Reserve Bank of India
WAR - Weighted Average Rate
RE - Revised Estimates WPI - Wholesale Price Index
REER - Real Effective Exchange Rate WTI - West Texas Intermediate
RHS - Right Hand Side WTO - World Trade Organisation
RMSEs - Root Mean Square Errors y-o-y - Year-on-Year
vii
MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
I. Macroeconomic Outlook
Underneath current benign inflation conditions, there are broad-based inflation pressures, which make the inflation
outlook for 2017-18 challenging. Growth in real gross value added is expected to accelerate in 2017-18, underpinned
by strong consumption demand even as investment activity remains muted and external demand uncertain.
Under the monetary policy framework ushered in by The recent experience of MPCs in the UK, Sweden,
amendments to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act, Brazil, Thailand, Czech Republic and Hungary suggests
the monetary policy decision has been vested in a six that rate decisions have been based on unanimity
member monetary policy committee (MPC). Following (Chart I.1). Other recent cases in point are the decisions
its decision to lower the policy repo rate by 25 basis
of the US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in
points (bps) at the time of the October 2016 Monetary
its December 2016 and February 2017 meetings, and
Policy Report (MPR), the MPC decided to hold the
the Bank of England’s MPC in its meetings during
policy rate in the December 2016 and February 2017
October-February. Differences have been typically
meetings of its bi-monthly schedule.
confined to the size of the change in the policy rate
Four features distinguish these initial decisions under rather than contesting the overarching policy stance.1
the new regime. First, there was a calibrated shift in Existing research on monetary policy decision making
the policy stance from accommodative to neutral. suggests that divergences stem mainly from (i) MPC
Second, there was an overwhelming preference for
members’ policy preferences – the relative weight
waiting out the transitory effects of demonetisation
on price stability and output stabilisation – in their
and the unsettled political climate globally. Third,
reaction functions, and (ii) assessment of expected
each decision was taken by unanimity. Fourth,
economic conditions – the evolution of inflation and
within the consensus, members’ decisions appear
output gaps.2,3 Does the formative experience of the
to have been driven by individualistic approaches to
MPC in India suggest similar policy preferences and
arriving at them, as revealed in their written public
assessments of the outlook? It is too early to tell.
statements.
1 Riboni, Alessandro and Francisco Ruge-Murcia (2014), “Dissent in Monetary Policy Decisions”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 66, pp.137-154.
Thornton, Daniel and David Wheelock (2014), “Making Sense of Dissents: A History of FOMC Dissents”, Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis Review, Third Quarter, pp.213-227.
Barwell, Richard (2016), “No Hawks, no Doves, only Consensus: How Central Banks Set Interest Rates?”, Voxeu.org.
2 Hansen, Stephen, Michael McMahon, and Carlos Rivera (2014), “Preferences or Private Assessments on a Monetary Policy Committee?”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 67, pp.16-32.
3 Some other factors highlighted in the literature that can impinge on the rate outcome are: (a) perception among members that a disagreement might be
seen as a sign of incompetence; and (b) dominance by the Chair.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
The analysis of macroeconomic developments
presented in chapters II and III explains why both
inflation and output growth have undershot the
forecasts set out in the October 2016 MPR. In part,
these deviations reflect the impact of demonetisation.
Turning to the outlook, recent domestic and global
events warrant revisions to the baseline assumptions
on initial conditions set out in the October 2016 MPR
(Table I.1). First, international crude oil prices have
fluctuated widely over the last six months, hardening
initially on the back of the agreement by Organisation
of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) to
curtail production becoming credible.4 More recently,
these prices have eased with shale production
stepping up, US inventories rising sizeably and a vast
amount of past supply.5 Nonetheless, oil prices are
now ruling around 10 per cent above the level (US$ 46
per barrel) assumed in October 2016. Domestic petrol and diesel prices increased by around `5.5 per litre
and `4.2 per litre, respectively, between November
Table I.1: Baseline Assumptions for
Near-Term Projections 2016 and February 2017 and were cut by around `4.9
per litre and `3.5 per litre, respectively, effective
Variable October 2016 MPR Current (April 2017)
MPR April 1, 2017 (Chart I.2).
Crude oil (Indian US$ 46 per barrel US$ 50 per barrel Second, the foreign exchange market has experienced
basket) during FY 2016-17:H2 during FY 2017-18
bouts of volatility triggered by international
Exchange rate `67/US$ Current level
developments. The Indian rupee depreciated sharply
Monsoon Normal for 2016 Normal for 2017 vis-à-vis the US dollar during November 8-28, 2016 in
Global growth 3.1 per cent in 2016 3.4 per cent in 2017 the aftermath of the US presidential election results.
3.4 per cent in 2017 3.6 per cent in 2018
Since then, the rupee has recovered lost ground and
Fiscal deficit To remain within BE To remain within BE appreciated beyond the October 2016 level (`67 per
2016-17 (3.5 per cent) 2017-18 (3.2 per cent)
USD).
Domestic No major change No major change
macroeconomic/ Third, global growth and trade have evolved at a
structural policies
sluggish pace, as expected. Looking ahead, their pace
during the forecast
period is expected to accelerate modestly in 2017, benefitting
Notes: from the expected fiscal stimulus in the US and the
1. Crude oil (Indian basket) represents a derived basket comprising sour strengthening recovery from recent macroeconomic
grade (Oman and Dubai average) and sweet grade (Brent) crude oil
processed in Indian refineries in the ratio of 71:29. strains in major emerging market and developing
2. The exchange rate path assumed here is for the purpose of generating economies (EMDEs). A sobering thought, however,
RBI staff’s baseline growth and inflation projections and does not
indicate any ‘view’ on the level of the exchange rate. The Reserve is that global growth has repeatedly disappointed
Bank is guided by the need to contain undue volatility in the foreign
initial expectations in the past few years (Chart I.3).
exchange market and not by any specific level/band around the
exchange rate. Consequently, downside risks suffuse the domestic
3. Global growth projections are based on July 2016 and January 2017
outlook for 2017-18.
updates of the IMF’s World Economic Outlook.
4. BE: Budget Estimates.
I.1 The Outlook for Inflation
4 On November 30, 2016, OPEC members agreed to cut production by 1.2 Headline inflation declined to significantly low
million barrels per day (mb/d) to 32.5 mb/d, effective January 1, 2017. levels during November 2016-February 2017, much
5 Rising output from countries not included in OPEC accord is also reported lower than projected in the October 2016 MPR. Yet,
to be undermining the effectiveness of the deal (“Oil’s Promised Land Slips
Away on OPEC Leaks”, Bloomberg, February 5, 2017). the persistence of inflation excluding food and fuel

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
poses a challenge to the inflation outlook. Also, there firms surveyed in the Reserve Bank’s industrial
is considerable uncertainty as to how prices will outlook survey in its January-March 2017 round
pan out over the coming months. As vegetable price (Chart I.5). Staff costs in the manufacturing sector
declines were likely on account of demonetisation- are also expected to increase in Q1:2017-18. Nominal
driven distress sales in addition to seasonal factors,6 wage growth in rural areas decelerated in December-
remonetisation could fuel a sharp reversal in vegetable January, partly on account of demonetisation.
prices, going forward. This development imparts Manufacturing and services sector firms in Nikkei’s
uncertainty to the near-term outlook for inflation. purchasing managers’ survey for March 2017
reported pressures from both input prices and
Households largely form inflation expectations
output prices.
adaptively, based on past movements in salient
prices, especially those of food and fuel. The March Professional forecasters surveyed by the Reserve
2017 round of the Reserve Bank’s survey of urban Bank in March 2017 expected CPI inflation to pick up
households indicated an increase of 20-50 bps in
inflation expectations over the December round,
reversing partly the sharp decline of 2-3 percentage
points recorded in the previous (i.e., December)
round. Three months and one year ahead inflation
expectations were 7.5 per cent and 8.8 per cent,
respectively. The proportion of respondents expecting
the general price level to increase by more than the
current rate also edged higher (Chart I.4).
The hardening of global oil, metal and other
commodity prices that is driving the recent surge
in India’s wholesale inflation is imparting input
price pressures for firms. Pricing power is also
expected to improve, as reflected by manufacturing
6 While headline inflation moderated to 3.2 per cent in January 2017,
inflation excluding vegetables was 4.5 per cent.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
from its current level to 5.3 per cent by Q4:2017-18 Taking into account the revised baseline assumptions,
(Chart I.6). Their medium-term inflation expectations signals from the various forward-looking surveys and
(five years ahead) increased marginally by 10 bps to estimates from structural and other models (Box I.1),
4.8 per cent. Their longer-term inflation expectations RBI staff’s baseline path for headline CPI inflation is
(10 years ahead) remained unchanged at 4.5 per cent, expected to take it from its current level of 3.7 per cent
close to the Reserve Bank’s medium-term inflation (February 2017) to 4.2 per cent in Q1:2017-18, and 4.7
target of four per cent. per cent in Q2. It is then forecast to edge higher to
Box I.1: Inflation Forecast Combinations
Timely and reliable forecasts of inflation are critical vis-à-vis individual models, the following eight time
inputs for setting forward-looking monetary policy. series models are analysed: (i) a random walk (RW)
Forecasting inflation is challenging in all countries, model; (ii) a first-order autoregression (AR) model; (iii)
both advanced and emerging, but it is rendered tenuous a Phillips curve (PC) model; (iv) a moving average model
in emerging economies on account of recurrent supply with stochastic volatility (MA-SV); (v) a three-variable
shocks. Most central banks, therefore, use a suite of vector autoregression (VAR) model; (vi) a three-variable
models, supplemented with informed judgement, for VAR with one exogenous variable (VARX) model; (vii)
obtaining reasonably robust forecasts. Underlying this
a Bayesian VAR (BVAR) model; and (viii) a Bayesian
preference is a tacit recognition that all models are mis-
VARX (BVARX) model.7 Three approaches are used
specified in some dimension and at some time points.
for combining the forecasts of the individual models:
In this context, a forecast combination approach –
(i) a simple average of individual model forecasts;
combining forecasts from alternative models through
(ii) a performance-based weighted average, based on
a judicious weighting system – finds favour among
time varying weights (TVW) derived from the individual
practitioners. Forecast combinations can act as a useful
forecast performance of the past three years; and
hedge against bad forecast performance of individual
(iii) time varying geometrically backward decaying
models, especially when inflation is volatile (Hubrich
weights (TV-GDW) (i.e., a larger weight is given to the
and Skudelny, 2017).
model’s recent performance). Quarterly data from
In order to empirically validate if a forecast combination Q1:2000 to Q3:2016 are used to estimate these models.
approach in the Indian context shows promising results
(contd.)
7 The VAR and BVAR models have three endogenous variables [output growth, CPI inflation and the policy repo rate], while the VARX and BVARX models
have four variables [three endogenous variables (as defined previously) and one exogenous (oil prices) variable]. For a truly pseudo-real out-of-sample
comparative assessment, the exogenous variables (oil price in the VARX/BVARX models and output gap in the Phillips curve model) for the out-of-sample
forecasting horizon are modelled as AR processes.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Chart 1: Inflation Forecasting Performance: Individual Models versus Combination
Notes:
1. Charts above represent the ratio of RMSE of individual models and combination models vis-à-vis the benchmark RW model.
2. RW: Random Walk Model; AR: first-order Autoregression Model; PC: Phillips Curve; MA-SV: Moving Average Model with Stochastic Volatility;
VAR: Vector Autoregression; VARX: VAR with exogenous variable; BVAR: Bayesian VAR; BVARX: Bayesian VAR with exogenous variable.
3. Average, TVW and TV-GDW are combination models with simple average, time varying weights and time varying geometrically decaying weights,
respectively, of the individual models.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
Forecast performance is measured by the inverse of the feature especially helpful from the monetary policy
root mean square errors (RMSEs) of individual models perspective, given transmission lags. Overall, the
and their combinations (relative to the benchmark RW results suggest that combining forecasts from a range
model) for two alternative forecasting horizons (one of models outperforms an individual model. This is
quarter ahead and four quarters ahead) (Chart 1). The the approach that RBI staff adopts, as explained in the
results suggest that (a) performance-based forecast September 2015 MPR.
combinations improve over both individual models Reference:
and simple averaging; (b) the relative forecasting
Hubrich, K. and F. Skudelny (2017), “Forecast
performance improves considerably as the horizon Combination for Euro Area Inflation: A Cure in Times
is extended from one quarter to four quarters, a of Crisis?”, Journal of Forecasting, DOI: 10.1002/for.2451.
5.1 per cent in Q3 on account of the demonetisation-
induced base effect before moderating to 4.9 per cent
in Q4:2017-18, with risks evenly balanced around
this trajectory (the 50 per cent confidence interval
for inflation in Q4:2017-18 is in a range of 3.4-6.4
per cent and the 70 per cent confidence interval is
in a range of 2.6-7.2 per cent) (Chart I.7). Forecasts
from the structural model indicate that inflation
may evolve in a stable manner through 2018-19 and
reach 4.6 per cent in Q4:2018-19 under the baseline
scenario, with the monetary policy stance remaining
unchanged. There are three major upside risks to
the baseline inflation path – uncertainty in crude oil
prices; exchange rate volatility due to global financial
market developments, especially if political risks
materialise; and implementation of the house rent

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
allowances under the 7th Central Pay Commission
(CPC) award. The likely impact of these shocks to
headline inflation is explored in Section I.3. The
proposed introduction of the goods and services tax
(GST) in 2017-18 also poses some uncertainty for the
baseline inflation path, particularly on account of one-
off but somewhat uncertain duration of price effects
that are typically associated with the introduction of
taxes on value added in the cross-country experience
(see the October 2016 MPR for a review).
I.2 The Outlook for Growth
With the effects of demonetisation turning out to be
short-lived and modest relative to some doomsday
expectations, the outlook for 2017-18 has been
brightened considerably by a number of factors.
First, with the accelerated pace of remonetisation,
Turning to forward-looking surveys, the consumer
discretionary consumer spending held back by
confidence moderated in the March 2017 round of
demonetisation is expected to have picked up from
Reserve Bank’s survey (Chart I.8). Respondents were
Q4:2016-17 and will gather momentum over several
less optimistic about the prospects for economic
quarters ahead. The recovery will also likely be aided
conditions, employment, and income a year ahead.
by the reduction in banks’ lending rates due to large
inflows of current and savings accounts (CASA) Sentiment in the corporate sector improved during
deposits, although the fuller transmission impact January-March 2017, according to the Reserve Bank’s
might be impeded by stressed balance sheets of banks industrial outlook survey (Chart I.9). The improvement
and the tepid demand for bank credit. was led by optimism on future production, order
books, exports, employment, financial situation,
Second, various proposals in the Union Budget 2017-18
selling prices and profit margin. Amounts mobilised
are expected to be growth stimulating: stepping up of
capital expenditure; boosting the rural economy and
affordable housing; the planned roll-out of the GST;
and steps to attract higher foreign direct investment
(FDI) through initiatives like abolishing the Foreign
Investment Promotion Board (FIPB).
Third, global trade and output are expected to expand
at a stronger pace in 2017 and 2018 than in recent
years, easing the external demand constraint on
domestic growth prospects. However, the recent
increase in the global commodity prices, if sustained,
could have a negative impact on our net commodity
importing domestic economy. Finally, the pace of
economic activity would critically hinge upon the
outturn of the south-west monsoon, especially in
view of the rising probability being assigned to an el
niño event in July-August, 2017.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Table I.2: Business Expectations Surveys Table I.3: Reserve Bank's Baseline and Professional
Forecasters' Median Projections
Item NCAER FICCI Dun and CII
(Per cent)
Business Overall Bradstreet Business
Confidence Business Composite Confidence
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19
Index Confidence Business Index
(January Index Optimism (January
Reserve Bank’s Baseline Projections
2017) (January Index 2017)
2017) (January Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 3.6 4.9 4.6
2017) Real Gross Value Added (GVA) Growth 6.7 7.4 8.1
Current level of 112.0 58.2 65.4 56.5 Assessment of Survey of Professional
the index Forecasters@
Index as per 133.3 67.3 80.0 58.0
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 3.6 5.3
previous Survey
% change (q-o-q) -16.0 -13.5 -18.3 -2.6 GVA Growth 6.7 7.3
sequential Agriculture and Allied Activities 4.2 3.5
% change (y-o-y) -14.0 2.6 -23.9 4.8 Industry 6.1 7.0
Services 7.6 8.5
Gross Domestic Saving (per cent of GNDI) 31.5 31.8
through initial public offerings (IPOs) in recent
Gross Fixed Capital Formation 27.0 28.8
months and filings of red herring prospectuses with (per cent of GDP)
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) have Money Supply (M3) Growth 7.5 10.5
Credit Growth of Scheduled Commercial 6.0 10.0
been higher, which suggest investment optimism in
Banks
the period ahead. Both manufacturing and services Combined Gross Fiscal Deficit 6.5 6.3
(per cent of GDP)
firms expected output to be higher a year from now,
Central Government Gross Fiscal Deficit 3.5 3.2
according to the purchasing managers’ survey for (per cent of GDP)
March 2017. Surveys conducted by other agencies Repo Rate (end period) 6.25 6.00
CRR (end period) 4.00 4.00
indicate a decline in optimism over their previous
Yield of 91-day Treasury Bills (end period) 6.0 6.3
rounds (Table I.2).
Yield of 10-year Central Government 6.8 6.7
Securities (end period)
Professional forecasters surveyed by the Reserve Bank
Overall Balance of Payments (US $ bn.) 20.8 32.2
in March 2017 expected real GVA growth to accelerate
Merchandise Exports Growth 2.8 5.9
from 6.5 per cent in Q4:2016-17 to 7.6 per cent in Merchandise Imports Growth -2.0 7.1
Q4:2017-18, led by growth in services and industry Merchandise Trade Balance (per cent of GDP) -5.0 -5.1
Current Account Balance (per cent of GDP) -0.9 -1.2
(Chart I.10 and Table I.3).
Capital Account Balance (per cent of GDP) 1.8 2.4
@: Median forecasts; GNDI: Gross National Disposable Income.
Sources: RBI staff estimates; and Survey of Professional Forecasters (March 2017).
Considering the baseline assumptions, the fast pace
of remonetisation, survey indicators and updated
model forecasts, RBI staff’s baseline scenario projects
that real GVA growth will improve from 6.6 per cent
in Q3:2016-17 and 6.5 per cent in Q4 to 7.0 per cent
in Q1:2017-18 and 7.4-7.6 per cent in the remaining
three quarters of 2017-18, with risks evenly balanced
around this baseline path (Chart I.11). Looking
beyond 2017-18 and assuming a normal monsoon,
a congenial global environment, no policy induced
structural change and no supply shocks, structural
model estimates yield real GVA growth of 8.1 per cent
in 2018-19.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
I.3 Balance of Risks Conversely, if some of the OPEC members do not
adhere to the agreed production cuts and/or the shale
The baseline projections of growth and inflation
gas producers continue to ramp up production, global
presented in the preceding section are based on the
prices could soften below the baseline. Should crude
assumptions set out in Table I.1. As usual, there are
prices slip under this scenario to around US$ 45 per
uncertainties surrounding these assumptions which
barrel by 2017-18, inflation could moderate by around
could produce deviations from baseline projections.
15 bps with growth benefitting by around 5 bps.
This section assesses the sensitivity of the projected
(ii) Global Demand
baseline paths of growth and inflation to plausible
alternate scenarios. The baseline scenario assumes that global growth will
accelerate during 2017 and 2018. Risks to the baseline
(i) International Crude Oil Prices
could emanate from: (a) US fiscal expansion being less
The September 2016 announcement by OPEC of
agreement on production cuts by members was
met with scepticism. The signing of the agreement
in end-November, however, led to a sharp jump in
global crude oil prices. If OPEC sticks to the agreed
production cuts of 1.2 mb/day till the next review of
the agreement in May 2017, and the global crude oil
production balance moves to a deficit by Q1:2017-18,8
upside risk to the crude oil trajectory over baseline
estimates will heighten. Any supply disruptions due
to geo-political developments could accentuate these
upside risks. Assuming that crude prices increase to
around US$ 60 per barrel under this scenario, inflation
could be higher by around 30 bps and growth could be
weaker by around 10 bps (Charts I.12 and I.13).
8 Oil Market Report, February 2017, International Energy Agency.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
than expected or marked by delays; (b) the Federal the US presidential elections, the risk of renewed
Reserve’s monetary policy response to expansionary turbulence in global financial markets on account
fiscal policy being larger than expected, especially of global downsides materialising and associated
in the context of a recent assessment that the US volatility in domestic financial markets remains a clear
economy is “closing in on full employment”; (c) the
and present danger to the Indian economy. A five per
now pervasive spectre of protectionism affecting
cent depreciation of the Indian rupee, relative to the
global trade; (d) continued concerns over the Chinese
baseline assumption, could push up inflation by 10-15
credit cycle; (e) volatile global crude oil and commodity
bps in 2017-18. The depreciation, however, could have
prices; and (f) the implications of all these factors for
a favourable impact on growth in 2017-18 through a
international financial markets. Feedback loops can
boost to net exports. In contrast, the combination
exaggerate the impact of several of these factors on
of a benign global macroeconomic and financial
global growth.9
environment, the expected acceleration in domestic
Assuming that global growth in 2017 and 2018
growth and the policy initiatives to attract FDI flows
remains the same as was recorded in 2016 (i.e., 30-50
can lead to an appreciation of the domestic currency,
bps below the baseline assumption), real GVA growth
with a soothing impact on domestic inflation. A five
and inflation could turn out to be around 20 bps and
per cent appreciation of the Indian rupee, relative to
10 bps, respectively, below the baseline.
the baseline assumption, could soften inflation by
The pace of global economic activity could be higher
10-15 bps in 2017-18.
if the policy stimulus in the US turns out to be larger
(v) Deficient Monsoon
than currently expected. In this scenario, assuming
global growth is 50 bps higher, domestic growth could Rainfall dependence of Indian agriculture makes the
turn out to be around 25 bps above the baseline. broader economy vulnerable to monsoon outcomes.
Inflation could be higher by around 10 bps on the back The India Meteorological Department (IMD) is yet
of higher domestic demand as also imported impulses to release its forecast of the south-west monsoon for
from higher global commodity prices. 2017. Hence, the baseline scenario assumes a normal
(iii) Seventh Central Pay Commission Allowances south-west monsoon. However, the occurrence of el
niño is assuming a rising probability, as stated earlier,
The 7th CPC recommended an increase in house
dampening the prospects of agricultural production.11
rent allowance (HRA) of 8-24 per cent of basic pay.
Assuming the growth of output of agriculture and
The higher HRA would have a direct and immediate
allied activities suffers by one percentage point,
impact on headline CPI through an increase in
overall GVA growth could be lower by around 20 bps
housing inflation. Assuming a rate of increase in the
HRA as proposed by the 7th CPC is implemented from in 2017-18. The concomitant increase in food prices
early 2017-18 onwards and the State Governments could result in headline inflation rising 30 bps above
implement a similar order of increase with a lag of the baseline.
one quarter, CPI inflation could be 100-150 bps higher
To sum up, economic activity should recover in 2017-
than the baseline for 2017-18.10 The HRA impact on
18 on the back of the fast pace of remonetisation
inflation is expected to persist for 6-8 quarters, with
and the government’s focus on capital expenditure,
the peak effect occurring around 3-4 quarters from
rural economy and housing. The global economic
implementation. In addition, indirect effects could
environment may improve modestly, albeit amidst
occur from elevated inflation expectations.
several uncertainties. Headline inflation is projected
(iv) Exchange Rate
to increase during 2017-18, calling for close vigilance
Recognising that the domestic foreign exchange market and readiness for an appropriate monetary policy
witnessed heightened volatility in the aftermath of response, if warranted.
9 Kose, M. Ayhan, Csilla Lakatos, Franziska Ohnsorge and Marc Stocker 11 In March 2017, the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(2017), “The Global Role of the U.S. Economy: Linkages, Policies and Spill- (NOAA) indicated increasing odds (50-55 per cent) for el niño forming
overs”, Policy Research Working Paper 7962, World Bank. towards the second half of 2017, while the Australian Bureau of Meteorology
10 This increase in inflation will be the statistical direct effect of higher assessed the likelihood of el niño forming in 2017 at approximately
HRA, as house rents have a weight of 9.5 per cent in the CPI. 50 per cent.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
II. Prices and Costs
Consumer price inflation has eased significantly, mainly due to the large decline in food inflation, especially vegetables.
Excluding food and fuel, however, inflation has remained sticky. Input costs have firmed up and pose upside risks
to the path of inflation going forward.
The MPR of October 2016 had projected CPI inflation1 took inflation down to 3.2 per cent in January 2017,
moving in a narrow range of 5.0 to 5.3 per cent during an all-time low in the history of all India CPI-
Q3 and Q4 of 2016-17, on expectations of food inflation Combined (Chart II.2). The entire fall in inflation during
moderating and crude prices remaining benign. Food November 2016 to January 2017 can be explained by
inflation came off its July 2016 peak and eased during the deflation in prices of vegetables and pulses. As a
August-October 2016. The shock of demonetisation, result, unfavourable base effects, which should have
however, veered the inflation trajectory sharply below raised headline inflation during December 2016 to
its projected path, essentially on account of an abrupt January 2017, were overwhelmed by a collapse in
compression in food inflation. Prices of vegetables the month-on-month (m-o-m) momentum, bringing
sank into deflation and pulled down headline inflation down headline inflation by around 100 basis points
during November 2016-January 2017. Notwithstanding (Chart II.3). In February, however, the drag from these
the hardening of global crude oil prices in the wake
transitory effects began to ebb and headline inflation
of the agreement on production cuts by OPEC in late
edged up on a pickup in food and fuel price pressures.
November, the negative wedge between actual and
Despite the sharp fall in food inflation in the second
projected inflation widened through the second half
half of the year, the distribution of inflation across all
of 2016-17 (Chart II.1).
categories was largely centred around 4.5 per cent with
II.1 Consumer Prices
continuing high kurtosis and a positive skew (Chart
Headline inflation fell off its July cliff and was II.4). Diffusion indices for goods, services and the
already traversing a declining trajectory during overall CPI were all well above 50 over the financial
August through October when demonetisation hit year, suggesting that even as headline inflation fell to
in November. It triggered a downward spiral that a historic low, it was not broad-based (Chart II.5).
1 Headline inflation is measured by year-on-year changes in all-India CPI Combined (Rural+Urban).

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
II.2 Drivers of Inflation contribution of durable goods and services to overall
inflation for much of the financial year (Chart II.6b).
In retrospect, a historical decomposition shows that it
Inflation in the food and beverages category (with
was the large shock delivered by demonetisation and
a weight of 46 per cent of CPI) turned out to be the
the associated wage shock that explained much of the
active component of overall inflation in the second
overall change in the inflation trajectory in the second
half of 2016-17.
half of 2016-17. Past monetary policy tightening
Four factors stand out in the recent experience:
continued to have visceral effects in containing
inflation (Chart II.6a). In contrast, firmer crude prices First, prices of perishables played the most decisive
and gradually closing output gap turned out to be role, even during the three months preceding
sources of upside pressures, masked by the size of the demonetisation. In the months immediately
demonetisation shock. Non-food inflation remained following demonetisation, perishables became even
stubbornly sticky, hardened by the unchanging more prominent, with vegetable price movements
becoming pivotal after a decline of 21 per cent during
November 2016 to February 2017. Transactions in
fruits and vegetables have always been cash intensive.
Anecdotal evidence points to distress sales by farmers,
given their perishable nature. Vegetable prices usually
do exhibit a seasonal moderation during November-
February every year; during the 2016-17 season,
however, the decline in vegetable prices was more
pronounced than in previous years.
Second, the vegetable prices decline troughed in
January 2017 and thereafter showed a m-o-m increase
of 0.1 per cent in February.
Third, the seasonal decline in prices of vegetables is
typically driven by potato, onion and tomato prices,
which together constitute close to 40 per cent of
the vegetables index. This time around, potato and
tomato prices did exhibit seasonal easing but what

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
was noteworthy was the plunge in the prices of other points and headline inflation by 1.3 percentage points
vegetables – cabbage, cauliflower, palak/other leafy during November 2016 to January 2017.
vegetables, brinjal, gourd, peas and beans – which
No commentary on inflation in the food and beverages
usually contribute little to the observed seasonality
category in the second half of 2016-17 would be
(Chart II.7).
complete without incorporating an analysis of the
Fourth, inflation in perishables excluding vegetables extraordinary developments in prices of pulses. With
averaged 5 per cent since November, considerably a weight of 5.2 per cent in the food group and only 2.4
above the average headline inflation (Chart II.8).2 per cent in the CPI, pulses contributed 13 per cent of
The spatial and temporal dynamics of food prices the rising CPI inflation trajectory during the first half
post-demonetisation show that within the food 2016-17. In the second half so far, prices of pulses
group, the decline in vegetable prices was particularly turned into deflation and, with a contribution of (-) 2.5
large and seen across states and across wholesale and per cent, aided in bringing down headline inflation
retail markets (Box II.1). Excluding vegetables, food to historic low in the CPI series. Inflation in arhar
inflation would have been higher by 2.7 percentage and urad, which had spiked pulses inflation during
2 The perishables index in CPI (weight of around 26 per cent) was constructed as a sub-index of frequently purchased items (with 7-day recall period) and
includes items such as vegetables, egg, meat and fish, milk and products, fruits, and processed foods. Other perishables exclude vegetables.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Box II.1: Anatomy of Food Deflation: Post Demonetisation
State-wise CPI food inflation data for the period January 2013 to January 2017 were analysed at a monthly
frequency in a panel framework in order to make a comparative assessment of spatial, temporal and intra-food
group fixed effects in driving food inflation. Dynamic panel estimation1 was conducted on seasonally adjusted
annualised m-o-m CPI food inflation. The results showed that while fixed effects were insignificant for most
states, heterogeneity in inflation rates in sub-categories of food groups was significant. Even if the fiscal year 2016-
17 alone is considered, intra-food group fixed effects continued to remain significant for most groups. However,
vegetables and pulses stood out in terms of magnitude and direction when compared with the usual patterns
(Chart 1a and 1b). In the context of demonetisation, the panel analysis also showed significant time fixed effects
for November 2016 brought about by vegetables, suggesting unusual decline in prices post demonetisation.
Furthermore, the fall in retail vegetable prices seemed to have broadly mirrored the fall in wholesale prices post
demonetisation. Daily seasonally adjusted prices of potato and tomato, available for 88 centres across India,
were used for analysing vegetable price margins post demonetisation (9 November - 31 December 2016), and
remonetisation (January - February 2017).
1: Estimated using Arellano-Bover/Blundell-Bond “system” Generalised Method of Moments estimators.
(contd.)

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Using cluster analysis based on k-means clustering technique, the wholesale and retail prices were grouped into
three major clusters – low, medium and high price clusters – based on the data of the pre-demonetisation period
(September-October 2016). Post demonetisation, price moderation was observed across medium and high price
clusters in the wholesale and retail markets. With progressive remonetisation, the prices in these vegetables started
rising in both the wholesale and retail markets.
The 45 degree line in Chart 2 represents the level where wholesale and retail prices are equal. In the case of tomato,
retail prices fell even below wholesale prices for some centres, indicating a fall in retail margin post demonetisation.
In the case of potato prices, the movement was mostly along and above the 45 degree line implying that margins
were not impacted.
The movement in margins* can also be seen from Chart 3. In the case of tomato, margins collapsed post
demonetisation. As remonetisation progressed, margins rose again. These movements in margins were statistically
significant**. In the case of potato, the analysis also showed that some centres experienced higher retail prices post
demonetisation compared with wholesale prices, suggesting that in some cases the widening of retail-wholesale
margins was centre-specific.
*: Margin is measured as the difference between retail and wholesale prices.
**: The decline in margin for tomato is statistically significant at 1 per cent level.
2015-16 and the beginning of 2016-17, declined items such as prepared meals. Slippage in production
sharply during September 2016 to February 2017 during 2015-16 and 2016-17 caused double-digit
so much so that arhar prices at the mandi level in inflation in sugar prices during the year (Chart II.9a
the major producing states of Maharashtra, Madhya and b). Under cereals, inflation in respect of rice has
Pradesh, Gujarat and Karnataka dropped below the eased during October 2016 - January 2017, while
minimum support price (MSP). Gram prices, on the inflation in wheat continued to firm up. A number of
other hand, were an outlier, with inflation in this item price control measures have been undertaken by the
rising dramatically before moderating in Q4:2016-17. government for containing the price rise in the case
After two consecutive years of production shortfall, of sugar and edible oil, including imposition of stock-
adequate rainfall and better area coverage drove up holding limits, discouraging exports, and reduction in
pulses output during 2016-17 and mitigated price import duty on certain edible oils.
pressures considerably. Favourable supply side In the fuel group, the moderation in inflation in
measures taken by the government such as imports the first half of the financial year reversed and it
at zero import duty3, extension in stock limit of picked up from December 2016, driven by LPG and
pulses, raising MSPs in order to incentivise pulses kerosene. The rise in LPG broadly mirrored the
production and maintaining buffer stocks also turnaround in international LPG prices. In the case
helped in reining in price pressures. of kerosene, the uptick was driven by the increase in
subsidised kerosene prices by a calibrated `0.25 per
Within the food group, there were upside price
litre per month during July 2016 to February 2017, in
pressure points in sugar, cereals and other food
addition to rising international prices. The weighted
3 In case of tur, the import duty has been increased to 10 per cent. contribution of firewood and chips to overall fuel

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
b: Heat-map* of Food Inflation
Cereals and products
Meat and fish
Egg
Milk and products
Oils and fats
Fruits
Vegetables
Pulses and products
Sugar and confectionery
Spices
Non-alcoholic beverages
Prepared meals, etc.
<2 4 >6
y-o-y inflation (per cent)
*The heat map visually elaborates the evolution of inflation. Greener areas indicate
low inflation pressures and increasing order of red represents higher and higher
inflation.
inflation remained broadly unchanged (Chart II.10), diesel under additional revenue mobilisation (ARM)
underscoring the persistence in fuel inflation across measures, the mark-up of domestic over global prices
rural areas. has become more pronounced. With softening of
international crude oil prices since early February
CPI inflation excluding food and fuel remained sticky
2017, domestic pump prices of petrol and diesel were
at around 5 per cent during most of the second half
reduced with a lag in the beginning of April 2017
of 2016-17 (Chart II.11a). Housing and ‘clothing and
(Chart II.12).
footwear’ sub-groups were the main contributors,
accounting for 36.2 per cent of inflation in the category Excluding volatile components such as petrol and
as a whole. diesel, inflation in this group (CPI, excluding food and
fuel) averaged 4.7 per cent between September 2016
Other upside pressures in the group emanated
and February 2017 (Chart II.11a). Some moderation
from the firming up of international crude oil prices
in February came about on account of the goods
since December 2016 and the lagged pass-through to
component in this category – gold and silver in
domestic prices of petrol and diesel that are embedded
‘personal care and effects’; pharmaceuticals in health;
in transport and communication. With excise duty
and garments in the clothing sub-groups – although
increase of around `12 per litre for both petrol and
more readings need to be monitored to assess whether
this softening will endure (Chart II.13a). By contrast,
the contribution of the services component in all
these sub-groups remained sticky, especially housing
and education services (Chart II.13b).
Given the incidence of large and frequent supply
shocks on food and non-food items, trimming the
inflation distribution by removing specific portions
of upper and lower tails of the distribution is widely
used to assess underlying inflation movements, with
the weighted median being a specific case of trimming.
Trimmed means, the weighted median and exclusion-
based measures of CPI inflation revealed a central
tendency of 4.7 per cent during September 2016 to
February 2017 (Chart II.11b).
Notwithstanding some moderation in February, the
downward inflexibility in inflation excluding food

61-naJ 61-beF 61-raM 61-rpA 61-yaM 61-nuJ 61-luJ 61-guA 61-peS 61-tcO 61-voN 61-ceD 71-naJ 71-beF
Chart II.9: Drivers of Food Inflation
MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
and fuel has infused significant upside risks into the housing inflation of the 7th CPC house rent allowance
near-term outlook. The direct and indirect impact on award – once implemented by the Government – and
the size and duration of the ‘GST effect’ are other
upside risks to inflation in CPI in this category.
Other Measures of Inflation
An important development in the second half of
2016-17 is the divergence that has set in between
inflation measured by the CPI and by other measures.
This conveys valuable insights into the profile of CPI
inflation as it evolves in the months ahead. Inflation
measured by the sectoral consumer price indices
undershot headline CPI inflation, reflecting, inter
alia, the higher weight of food in the former as also
the absence of items such as gold and silver that
were recent pressure points. Inflation in terms of the
wholesale price index (WPI) was closely co-moving
with CPI inflation during October-December 2016,
but it shot up in January and further in February to

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
demonetisation and revealed its underlying trajectory
in the February 2017 reading, cost push pressures
appear to be coalescing. Domestic farm and non-farm
input costs escalated significantly in the second half
of 2016-17 on account of the rise in global crude oil
prices, the firming up of metal prices and expectations
of expansionary US fiscal spending (Chart II.15).
Coal inflation surged in January and February, with
Coal India Limited linking its premium quality coal
to international prices which hardened on account
of supply disruptions in Australia and China towards
the end of 2016. Substantial price pressures were also
observed in high speed diesel, naphtha, furnace oil,
cotton yarn and fibres all of which drove up inflation
in industrial input costs to the highest level since
early 2011. In the farm sector, price increases relating
to high speed diesel and pesticides, particularly
close to three percentage points above CPI inflation,
weedicides, largely contributed to the upturn in farm
driven by a sharp pick-up in international commodity
input costs. An analysis based on the Supply and
prices. GDP and GVA deflators rose in the beginning of
Use Table (SUT) of the Central Statistics Office (CSO)
the year, but edged down closer to CPI inflation from
comprising 140 products/services and 66 industries
Q3:2016-17 (Chart II.14).
shows that a one per cent increase in crude oil, metals
II.3 Costs
and coal prices could translate into an increase in WPI
Even as retail inflation and its measurement by inflation by 15 bps, 20 bps and 5 bps, respectively, and
other metrics has shrugged off the transitory drag of in CPI inflation by 6 bps, 7 bps and 2 bps, respectively.4
4 Using SUT, the first round pass-through impact of 1 per cent increase in domestic prices of certain commodities (due to international price pressure), is
estimated on WPI inflation. Onward transmission from wholesale to retail inflation is then estimated in a vector autoregression (VAR) framework with the
interest rate, WPI headline inflation and CPI headline inflation as endogenous variables. Bhanumurthy, N. R., S. Das, and S. Bose. (2012), Oil Price Shock,
Pass-through Policy and its Impact on India, National Institute of Public Finance and Policy, New Delhi, Working Paper Series, 99(2), 1-10.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Turning to wages and staff costs, rural wage growth Going forward, the inflation path will be shaped
for both agricultural and non-agricultural labourers by the implementation of house rent allowances
picked up through October-November 2016 before under the 7th CPC award and the introduction of the
moderating in December and January (Chart II.16). The GST; both these developments are likely to provide
divergence between agricultural and non-agricultural a push to headline inflation, the impact of which
wage growth remains wide, reflecting the increase in could last for 12-18 months. Moreover, several parts
demand for farm labour due to the invigoration of of the corporate sector, which have been struggling
agricultural activity. with balance sheet stress for a protracted period,
await a recovery in demand that will rekindle
In the organised sector, corporate sector performance
pricing power of firms so that they can rebuild their
points to a moderation in per employee staff cost of
bottom lines. While input costs have firmed up, the
listed private sector companies (Chart II.17a). A caveat
outlook for inflation will hinge upon a reasonably
in interpreting these developments is that the value
accurate assessment of the quantum of input price
of production grew at a slower pace than staff costs
increases that the firms may pass through to their
pushing up unit labour costs (i.e., the ratio of staff
output prices. Further, should the recent softening
cost to value of production) for both manufacturing
in crude oil prices – caused by build-up in oil stocks
and services companies, notwithstanding the
in the US, legacy oversupply from OPEC last year,
moderation seen in the latest reading (Chart II.17b).
and possible failure of production controls by OPEC
Firms polled in the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook
and Russia – continue, inflation trajectory could
survey reported a sharp pick-up in the cost of raw soften. Finally, with the rising probability of el niño,
materials as also in staff cost. Most of the firms expect as discussed in Chapter 1, the path of food inflation
to pass on the increase in costs into selling prices. may be impacted by the outcome of the monsoon
Similar sentiments about acceleration in input costs in the coming year and in this regard, supply
were reported by both manufacturing firms and management measures that have successfully led
service providers in purchasing managers’ indices. to deceleration in food inflation from double digits
Polled companies expect that the increase in costs will in 2012-13 and 2013-14 to close to 5 per cent in
strengthen output price inflation. 2016-17 so far, will play a crucial role.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
III. Demand and Output
The slowdown in aggregate demand, which set in at the beginning of H2:2015-16, became accentuated in
H2: 2016-17, although consumption demand remained resilient. Aggregate supply conditions were underpinned
by the robust performance of agriculture and steady government expenditure.
Economic activity has been losing momentum since GDP growth would have slumped to 5.9 per cent in
H2:2015-16 on a combination of structural and cyclical H2:2016-17 as against the headline print of 7.0 per
factors; in H2:2016-17, this trajectory was dented cent1. Private consumption remained the mainstay of
further by the transient impact of demonetisation. domestic demand, notwithstanding some deceleration
Both private and government consumption demand expected in the last quarter of the year. On a seasonally
have held up well against this slowdown, together adjusted basis, however, q-o-q growth suggests that
accounting for 90 per cent of real gross domestic the slowdown in aggregate demand bottomed out in
product (GDP) growth in H2:2016-17 on a weighted Q3 and an upturn commenced in Q4 on the back of a
contribution basis. Investment demand, which had tentative recovery in exports and investment (Chart
sunk into contraction in H1, recovered from Q3:2016- III.1, Table III.1).
17. Net exports have been growing strongly since
III.1.1 Private Final Consumption Expenditure
Q3:2015-16 but in Q3:2016-17, they turned negative
Private final consumption expenditure remains the
with imports starting to expand at a higher pace
bedrock of domestic demand, contributing over half
than exports as domestic demand strengthened.
of overall GDP growth in H2:2016-17 (Chart III.2). Its
The ebullient rebound in agricultural activity on
underlying resilience stood out in the face of cash
the back of normal monsoon and record foodgrains
constraints of demonetisation, with data pointing to
production have boosted rural incomes and supported
an acceleration of growth in this period on a sequential
consumption. In contrast, the modest pick-up in
basis. The expansion of consumer purchasing power
industry in H2:2016-17 and the slower growth in
in this period can be explained by a combination of
services suggests that investment demand is still
factors: improved rural consumption demand due
sluggish. Going forward, implementation of the
to (i) robust agricultural activity; (ii) sharp uptick
Goods and Services Tax (GST) and the measures taken
in Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
in the Union Budget to boost the rural economy,
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) expenditure (15 per cent
infrastructure, micro, small and medium enterprises
(MSMEs) and low cost housing should help invigorate
domestic demand. However, a sustained revival of
investment holds the key to stepping up the pace of
economic activity closer to its medium-term potential.
III.1. Aggregate Demand
Aggregate demand measured by y-o-y changes in real
GDP at market prices moderated through 2016-17,
with the slowdown being pronounced in the second
half of the year. Fiscal stimulus in the form of the 7th
Central Pay Commission’s (7th CPC) award supported
aggregate demand strongly; without the support of
government final consumption expenditure (GFCE),
1 Keeping in view the provision made by the Central Government for
additional expenditure on account of pay and pension in its budget for
2016-17, its overall impact was estimated at around 30 bps in the GVA
projected by the Reserve Bank for 2016-17 (RBI Annual Report, 2015-16).

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Table III.1: Real GDP Growth
(Per cent)
Item 2015-16 2016-17 Weighted 2015-16 2016-17
(SAE) contribution to
growth in 2016-17 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4#
(percentage points)*
Private Final Consumption Expenditure 7.3 7.2 4.0 4.9 6.7 6.8 10.6 7.2 5.1 10.1 6.5
Government Final Consumption Expenditure 2.9 17.0 1.7 0.5 3.9 3.7 3.6 15.5 15.2 19.9 18.1
Gross Fixed Capital Formation 6.1 0.6 0.2 9.6 12.4 3.2 0.0 -2.2 -5.3 3.5 6.5
Net Exports 13.9 62.0 0.7 -1.1 -4.9 27.0 89.6 70.4 74.5 -23.4 -
Exports -5.4 2.3 0.5 -5.7 -4.3 -9.0 -2.5 2.1 -0.9 3.4 4.4
Imports -5.9 -1.2 -0.3 -5.2 -3.6 -10.2 -4.4 -2.7 -7.4 4.5 1.4
GDP at Market Prices 7.9 7.1 7.1 7.8 8.4 6.9 8.6 7.2 7.4 7.0 7.0
SAE: Second Advance Estimates. #: Implicit growth.
*: Component-wise contributions to growth do not add up to GDP growth in the table because change in stocks, valuables and discrepancies are not included.
Source: Central Statistics Office (CSO).
for 2016-17); and (iii) rural wages remaining steady; in investment demand in spite of demonetisation
implementation of 7th CPC recommendations and effects can be explained by the pick-up in capital
One Rank One Pension (OROP) which buoyed already goods imports and moderation in the pace of
strong urban consumption demand and a significant contraction in domestic capital goods production as
fall in overall consumer inflation. also improvement in profits of software companies
(Chart III.4). Some momentum in investment activity is
In terms of lead indicators for estimating private
also visible in sectors such as electricity transmission,
final consumption expenditure, the surge in private
roads and renewable power.
consumption finds reflection in the acceleration in
agriculture GVA, telephone connections, indirect tax Nonetheless, it may be premature to interpret these
collections and manufacturing index of industrial proximate developments as green shoots of durable
production (IIP) (Chart III.3). revival of investment demand. A wider scan shows that
capex spending, especially in large brownfield projects
III.1.2 Gross Fixed Capital Formation
in sectors such as iron and steel, construction, textiles
After four consecutive quarters of either sharp and power, remains weak amidst an environment
deceleration or contraction, gross fixed capital of uncertainty surrounding growth, both global and
formation turned around in Q3 and accelerated further
in Q42. On the basis of lead indicators, this reversal
2 Implicit, from the latest available data of the CSO for Q1-Q3 and second
advance estimates of annual GVA.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
domestic, and over-indebtedness as well as excess Seasonally adjusted capacity utilisation has remained
capacity in many sectors. According to the Centre for below its average (since Q1:2013-14), reflecting weak
Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE), new investment demand and raising concerns on the sustainability
of the recent pick-up in private investment (Chart
proposals, which capture the future pace of investment
III.6). Decomposition of time series into trend and
activity, has recovered in Q4 from its decadal low
cycles of various frequencies, juxtaposed with a
level in Q3, driven by government projects. The
Markov switching exercise to detect regime shifts also
new investment projects increased to `2.57 trillion
suggests that the recent upturn may not yet confirm
in Q4 as against an average of `2.16 trillion in the
a definitive reversal in investment demand (Box III.1).
preceding nine quarters (Chart III.5a). The value of
Going forward, an increase in allocation of capital
stalled projects decreased by 51 per cent during the
expenditure by 10.7 per cent in the Union Budget
quarter, mainly accounted for by government sector
2017-18 is expected to generate some multiplier
projects (Chart III.5b). The problem of stalled projects effects, but the catalytic effects of fiscal crowding in
continues mainly because of lack of environmental setting off a turnaround in the investment cycle is
and non-environmental clearances. largely contingent on revival in private investment
Chart III.5: Investment Announced and Stalled Projects

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Box III.1: Investment Cycle in India: Some Insights from Wavelet Analysis
Gross domestic investment in India has been muted in a that the inflexion point in the investment cycle to a
prolonged phase that set in during the post global financial higher growth regime has still not materialised. Similar
crisis (GFC) period. Capacity utilisation has remained exercise on GDP growth rates [chart (b)] also does not
low and industrial activity depressed in an environment suggest any turnaround.
characterised by subdued global and domestic demand.
Furthermore, output and investment growth cycles
Consequently, when gross fixed capital formation
(annualised q-o-q) are also examined using Wavelet
(GFCF) posted positive growth in Q3:2016-17 after
analysis which offers the possibility of decomposing
three consecutive quarters of contraction, one question
the time series data into several series of orthogonal
has evoked considerable interest: Is the recent upturn
sequences of scales representing different periodicities/
indicating a turning point in the investment cycle and
frequencies. Charts (c) and (d) present the wavelet
what are the implications for growth?
transformation of GDP and GFCF growth rates [first
The Markov switching model of Hamilton (1989) was panel in Charts (c) and (d)] into a low frequency scale
applied on growth rates (annualised seasonally adjusted that represents the long-run trend in the growth rates
q-o-q) of investment [chart (a)] to check whether the [second panel in Charts (c) and (d)] and four relatively
recent surge in the investment growth rate is, in fact, a higher frequency levels [third to sixth panel in Charts (c)
turning point. Markov-switching probabilities suggest and (d)]. The addition of these low frequency and high
a: Markov-Switching Probability of Low Investment Growth Regime b: Markov-Switching Probability of Low GDP Growth Regime
c: Wavelet Decomposition1 Output Growth d: Wavelet Decomposition1 Investment Growth
e: Squared Cross-wavelet Coherence2 –
Output Growth and Investment Growth Notes: 1. Using Daubechies 4 wavelet at level 4 (Smooth wavelets like the
Daubechies 4 give better approximations to continuous functions). The
first panel in Charts(a) and (b) are the annualised q-o-q changes of GFCF
and GDP, respectively – represented by S = a4 + d4 + d3 + d2 + d1.
2. Cross wavelet and wavelet coherence software were provided by A.
Grinsted http://www.glaciology.net/wavelet-coherence. The Morlet
family of wavelet is used, as it provides a good balance between time
and frequency localization. Horizontal axis shows time, while vertical
axis shows period in years. The warmer the colour of region (more red),
the higher the degree of coherence between investment and output
growth cycles. Arrows indicate the relative phase relationship between
the series (pointing right: in-phase; left: anti-phase; up: GFCF leading
GDP). Black thick contour represents 5 per cent significance.
(contd.)

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
frequency decompositions produces the observed data. x-axis) and at different cycle lengths represented
Long-term GDP and GFCF growth rates seem to have by period (in y-axis). This indicates that output and
moderated in the years following the global financial investment cycles strongly co-moved in the 2-4 year
crisis. The moderation in the long-term investment cycle during the pre-crisis period, but co-moved only in
cycle has been much sharper than the output growth the 3-4 year cycle in the recent period. Therefore, the
cycle. The lower frequency cycles (of periodicities 2-4 uptick in the 2-year period cycle for investment might
years) of output growth do not show any visible signs not immediately translate into higher output growth.
of a turnaround in the recent period. However, the
References:
investment cycle (of periodicity 2 years) indicates some
increase [fourth panel in Chart (d)] consistent with the Hamilton, James D (1989), “A New Approach to the
higher GFCF growth rates recorded in H2:2016-17. Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time Series and
Business Cycle”, Econometrica, March, 57(2).
The red coloured regions inside the black thick contours
of the cross wavelet coherence in Chart (e) represent Yogo, M. (2008), “Measuring Business Cycles: A
the high and significant co-movement between output Wavelet Analysis of Economic Time Series”. Economics
and investment cycles at different time points (in Letters, 100(2), pp. 208-212.
appetite. A binding constraint is the heightened risk tobacco products. Receipts from the service tax grew
aversion among banks, many laden with double-digit by 17.1 per cent due to imposition of Krishi Kalyan
percentage of stressed assets to gross advances, to cess at 0.5 per cent from June 1, 2016. Relatively
finance sectors that are excessively leveraged. Sector- robust indirect tax collections and lower spending on
specific slack and demand substitution through subsidies also entailed a wider divergence between
cheaper imports in some segments due to excess global GVA and GDP growth rates.
capacity are other drags on the revival in investment.
The Union Budget, 2017-18 deferred the target for
III.1.3 Government Expenditure the gross fiscal deficit (GFD) to GDP ratio of 3.0 per
cent to 2018-19 from 2017-18. Nevertheless, the
Another key component of aggregate demand -
government remained committed to the spirit of
government final consumption expenditure (GFCE)
fiscal consolidation as the Centre’s GFD is budgeted
- continued to provide strong support to aggregate
to decline by 0.3 percentage point to 3.2 per cent in
demand in H2:2016-17 due to the implementation of
2017-18 through an increase in non-debt receipts,
the 7th CPC award and OROP. Lower spending on all
major subsidies - food, fertilisers and petroleum - particularly tax revenues and disinvestment proceeds.
contained Central Government’s revenue expenditure This makes room for enhanced budgetary allocation
at the budgeted level for 2016-17. Although there
was a shortfall in realisation of budgeted receipts Table III.2: Key Fiscal Indicators -
Central Government Finances
from disinvestment and spectrum auctions, buoyant
indirect tax collections and non-tax revenues helped Item Per cent to GDP
in realising the fiscal deficit target even as capital 2016-17 2016-17 2017-18
(BE) (RE) (BE)
expenditure did not experience any cutbacks, unlike
in previous years (Table III.2). In fact, the revised 1. Revenue Receipts 7.9 9.3 9.0
a. Tax Revenue (Net) 6.3 7.1 7.3
estimates (RE) of capital expenditure were 13.3 per
b. Non-Tax Revenue 1.7 2.2 1.7
cent higher than budgeted estimates (BE), reflecting 2. Non Debt Capital Receipts 0.4 0.4 0.5
improvement in expenditure quality. 3. Revenue Expenditure 11.5 11.4 10.9
4. Capital Expenditure 1.6 1.8 1.8
Union excise duty collections grew by 34.5 per cent 5. Total Expenditure 13.1 13.2 12.7
on a y-o-y basis on account of the upward revision in 6. Gross Fiscal Deficit 3.5 3.5 3.2
7. Revenue Deficit 2.3 2.0 1.9
clean environment cess, imposition of infrastructure
8. Primary Deficit 0.3 0.3 0.1
cess on certain motor vehicles, additional excise duty
Source: Union Budget, 2017-18.
on jewellery articles and increase in excise duty on Note: BE: Budget Esitmates RE: Revised Estimates

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Table III.3: Major Deficit Indicators of III.1.4 External Demand
State Governments
After making positive contribution to GDP in the
(Per cent of GSDP)
last four quarters, net exports contracted sharply
Item 2016-17 2016-17 2017-18
and pulled down GDP growth in Q3:2016-17. Growth
(BE) (RE) (BE)
in merchandise exports as well as imports turned
Revenue Deficit -0.1 0.2 -0.1
positive for the first time in eight quarters; however, a
Gross Fiscal Deficit 3.0 3.4 2.6
stronger pick-up in imports than in exports expanded
Gross Fiscal Deficit ( Excluding UDAY) - 3.0 -
Primary Deficit 1.3 1.7 0.9 the trade deficit in Q3 and the first two months of Q4.
Notes: 1. Negative (-) sign indicates surplus. Notwithstanding the slowdown in global demand,
2. Data pertain to 21 out of 29 States.
3. UDAY data as per RBI records. evident in weak imports by advanced economies
Source: Budget Documents of State Governments.
(AEs), India’s exports to AEs resisted this slowdown
and actually increased in Q2 and Q3:2016-17 alongside
for the farm and rural sectors, social and physical
the pick-up in exports to emerging market economies
infrastructure, and employment generation. Future
(EMEs) which had accounted for a large part of the
fiscal consolidation is contingent upon efficient
decline in India’s exports over the last two years. In
revenue mobilisation - broadening the tax base; and
fact, export shipments to EMEs registered positive
incentivising digital payments.
growth for the first time since Q3:2014-15.
The latest available data in respect of 21 States suggest
Significantly, the turnaround in India’s export growth
an increase in GFD to gross state domestic product
in Q3 was led by non-oil exports with almost the entire
(GSDP) ratio to 3.4 per cent in 2016-17 (RE) against 3.0
per cent budgeted. Net of Ujwal DISCOM Assurance
Yojana (UDAY) bonds, however, the ratio was lower
at 3.0 per cent. For 2017-18 (BE), The GFD-GSDP ratio
of 21 states works out to 2.6 per cent (Table III.3).
The deterioration in State finances during 2016-17
will impact the overall fiscal position of the general
government.
The Centre’s borrowing programme was conducted as
per the planned issuance schedule within the overall
contour of debt management strategy. Combined
gross market borrowings of the Centre and States
(dated securities) during 2016-17 increased by 9.6 per
cent over the previous year (Table III.4). Increased
borrowing by the state governments may exert
pressure on the finite pool of investible resources and
crowd out private investment.
Table III.4: Government Market Borrowings
(` billion)
Item 2015-16 2016-17
Centre States Total Centre States Total
Net Borrowings 4,406.3 2,611.9 7,018.2 4,082.0 3,426.5 7,508.5
Gross Borrowings 5,850.0 2,945.6 8,795.6 5,820.0 3,819.8 9,639.8

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
increase in oil exports accounted for by the increase in proposals and the change in the monetary policy
international crude oil prices. Exports of some labour- stance of the Reserve Bank. FPIs in both the equity
intensive sectors such as ready-made garments, gems and debt segments recorded net inflow of US$ 11.6
and jewellery, and leather and products experienced billion in February and March 2017. FPIs have been
transient pressures from demonetisation. All broad more bullish about the continuance of the domestic
categories of imports, viz. oil, gold and non-oil non- reforms, especially after decisive outcomes in recent
gold imports, increased during October-February State elections. Inflows in the debt segment were
2016-17 (Chart III.7). Gold imports, which rose in largely influenced by domestic and global interest
November after demonetisation and declined sharply rate differentials. Higher repayments caused net
in the next two months, increased in February 2017 outflow of external commercial borrowings during
due to domestic stockpiling ahead of festive (Akshaya April-February of 2016-17. Net outflow of US$ 18.0
Tritiya) and wedding season. Strong price effects billion of non-resident deposits during October 2016
caused by Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting to January 2017 reflected the redemption of FCNR
Countries (OPEC) production cut pushed up the (B) deposits.
growth of oil imports in nominal terms even as
III.1.5 Discrepancies in GDP
import volumes declined in recent months.
In India, real economic activity gets more
Net services exports moderated in H2:2016-17 comprehensively captured through Gross Value
(October 2016 - January 2017) in relation to the Added (GVA) at basic prices across all the sectors of
corresponding period of 2015-16. Among services the economy. Real GDP at market prices is derived by
exports, India’s software exports face uncertainty adding net indirect taxes (product taxes minus product
from global headwinds, especially from the likely subsidies) to real GVA at basic prices. Independently
restrictions relating to the H1-B visas. A higher flow estimated private and government final consumption,
of tourist arrivals augured well for exports of travel gross fixed capital formation and net exports do not
services. The net outgo due to investment income add up to this total, resulting in discrepancies in GDP,
payments in Q3, however, was marginally lower especially in quarterly estimates.
than in the corresponding period of 2015-16. Private
III.2 Aggregate Supply
transfer receipts, mainly representing remittances by
III.2.1 Output Growth
Indians employed overseas, declined by 3.8 per cent
in Q3 from their level a year ago. Despite a lower Output growth in terms of GVA at basic prices
merchandise trade deficit, current account deficit at decelerated in H2:2016-17 relative to H1 and a
1.4 per cent of GDP in Q3 was almost at the same level year ago, with the impact of demonetisation on
as a year ago, though higher than the preceding two manufacturing and services sector activity turning out
quarters. to be smaller and transient relative to the underlying
moderation that has been in evidence since H2:2015-
While net FDI inflows at US$ 13.2 billion in H2:2016-
16 (Table III.5). The agriculture sector remained
17 (October 2016 - January 2017) moderated from the
resilient and rebounded on the strength of a normal
level a year ago, net portfolio flows turned positive in
monsoon after two consecutive years of near drought
Q4. On a cumulative basis, net FDI inflows, however,
conditions, vigorous sowing activity and effective
rose to US$ 33.9 billion in April-January 2016-17 as
supply management by the Government.
compared with US$ 31.6 billion a year ago, suggesting
India is becoming a preferred investment destination. Seasonally adjusted q-o-q annualised GVA movements
The bout of global risk aversion that caused net also confirm the weakening of growth in H2:2016-
outflow of foreign portfolio investment (FPI) 17vis-à-vis H1 (Chart III.8a). For H2, the October
during November 2016 to January 2017 subsided MPR had projected GVA growth of 7.7 per cent.
subsequently as foreign portfolio investors turned It had noted that the actual outcome for Q1 had
net buyers in response to the Union Budget matched projections given in the April 2016 MPR.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Table III.5: Sector-wise Growth in GVA
(Per cent)
Sector Contribution- 2015-16 2016-17 2015-16 2016-17
Weighted (SAE)
2016-17 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4#
Agriculture & Allied Activities 0.7 0.8 4.4 2.6 2.3 -2.2 1.7 1.9 3.8 6.0 5.0
Industry 1.6 10.3 6.7 8.3 10.3 12.0 10.6 7.6 5.6 8.0 5.6
Mining & quarrying 0.0 12.3 1.3 11.2 13.9 13.3 11.5 -0.3 -1.3 7.5 -0.7
Manufacturing 1.4 10.6 7.7 8.5 10.3 12.8 10.8 9 6.9 8.3 6.8
Electricity, gas, water supply and other utilities 0.1 5.1 6.6 2.5 5.9 4.1 7.8 9.6 3.8 6.8 6.4
Services 4.4 8.8 7.2 8.8 9 8.5 9.1 7.8 7.6 6.3 7.3
Construction 0.3 2.8 3.1 4.8 0.0 3.2 3.0 1.7 3.4 2.7 4.8
Trade, hotels, transport, communication 1.4 10.7 7.3 10.6 8.9 9.6 13.2 8.2 6.9 7.2 7.0
Financial, real estate & professional services 1.4 10.8 6.5 10.2 13.1 10.4 8.9 8.7 7.6 3.1 5.9
Public administration, defence and other services 1.4 6.9 11.2 6.3 7.2 7.5 6.7 9.9 11 11.9 11.7
GVA at Basic Prices 6.7 7.8 6.7 7.8 8.4 7.0 8.2 6.9 6.7 6.6 6.5
SAE: Second Advance Estimates. #: Implicit
Source: Central Statistics Office (CSO).
The CSO’s estimates for Q2: 2016-17 GVA at 6.7 per sector and some sub-components of the services
cent undershot RBI staff’s April projections sizeably, sector pulled down GVA growth out of alignment
suggesting greater than expected loss of momentum with the October MPR projections, but these effects
(Chart III.8b). The projected pace of acceleration in were much more muted and transitory than the loss
agriculture on the back of favourable base effects did of momentum in Q2 on the more endemic factors
not materialise and output from allied activities slowed described earlier. Moreover, large unanticipated
more than expected. Furthermore, the anticipation of data revisions relating to 2014-16 also contributed
an investment-driven boost to electricity generation to the deviations from the October MPR projections.
and mining and quarrying was belied. Construction These developments were closely monitored and
activity also weakened more than projected on weaker reassessments were made in the December 2016 and
demand. February 2017 MPC resolutions in which the annual
GVA growth projection was pared to 7.1 and 6.9 per
The sharper loss of momentum was further evident
cent, respectively.
in CSO’s subsequent data releases. The rise in crude
oil prices, which adversely affected corporate bottom The impact of demonetisation on the overall GVA
lines, also contributed. In addition, the knock-on growth was mitigated by a significantly higher growth
effects of demonetisation, especially in the industrial in agriculture and public administration and defence
Chart III.8: GVA Growth and Forecast Performance

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
The strong performance in foodgrains was not,
however, matched by the horticulture sector. Its
growth decelerated during 2016-17 as per advance
estimates. Yet, livestock, barring wool production,
grew at a robust pace, providing an alternate source
of income to the rural population and supporting GVA
from agriculture and allied activities as a whole.
III.2.3 Industrial Sector
Value added in the industrial sector decelerated in
H2:2016-17 on a y-o-y basis, led by manufacturing.
Sequentially, however, activity in the sector gained
momentum in the same period, buoyed mainly by
the better performance of the mining and quarrying
sectors. Organised industry remained largely resilient
in the face of demonetisation. The deceleration in
the industrial sector was discernible even before the
demonetisation - the IIP contracted by 0.3 per cent
and other services (PADO) components of the services
in the period April-October 2016 as compared with
sector. Even after excluding government spending,
a growth of 4.8 per cent in the same period of the
the momentum of GVA growth remained broadly
previous year. This deceleration was partly on account
unchanged in Q3: 2016-17 (Chart III.9).
of the negative base effect relating to insulated rubber
III.2.2 Agriculture cables, which pulled down IIP (Chart III.10). Trimmed
off insulated rubber cables, IIP growth during April-
The growth of agriculture and allied activities
October 2016 was 3.0 per cent. The subsequent
accelerated in H2: 2016-17 on a y-o-y basis as well
waning of the negative base effect helped in propping
as sequentially, reflecting the record foodgrains
up IIP, aided by a pick-up in momentum.
production. Furthermore, adequate soil moisture,
a reasonable northeast monsoon in the initial part The mining and quarrying segment slowed down
of the season and comfortable reservoir levels from the beginning of 2016-17, mainly reflecting tepid
(above the 10-year average) resulted in an increase coal production. Post demonetisation, the growth of
in sowing of rabi crops by 5.7 per cent over a year
ago. Higher sowing, particularly in wheat, pulses
and oilseeds, coupled with other factors such as
timely announcement of minimum support prices
(MSPs) (especially for pulses) and availability of key
agricultural inputs supported agricultural activity. It is
important to note that rabi sowing in all subsequent
weeks after the announcement of demonetisation
remained higher than a year ago - except for the week
ended November 18, 2016 - suggesting that there was
no impact on sowing activity per se.
The dwindling of wheat stocks below the quarterly
buffer norm during August 2016 till date prompted an
increase in wheat imports. Import of pulses also grew
significantly during the year. The record production of
wheat and pulses in 2016-17 is expected to augment
stocks substantially and keep prices under check.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
the mining and quarrying sector, which is less cash
intensive, accelerated sequentially. This was on
account of improvement in coal production, although
natural gas and crude oil production continued to
contract.
The impact of demonetisation on the manufacturing
sector was transient - after contracting in December
2016, manufacturing output bounced back in January
2017. The manufacturing PMI, which had slipped in
the contractionary zone in December 2016, expanded
in January-March 2017. The performance of listed
private companies remained resilient as sales and net
profit growth improved at the aggregate level, although
the performance of non-information technology (non-
IT) service sector companies continued to be lacklustre
(Chart III.11). Sales in cash intensive sectors such
as fast moving consumer goods (FMCG) and motor
implementation of the Ujwal DISCOM Assurance
vehicles declined in Q3 vis-à-vis the previous quarter
Yojana (UDAY) scheme, the outlook for electricity
(Chart III.12a and b). However, lead indicators such
generation has brightened considerably.
as passenger car sales and consumer durables suggest
that this impact was short-lived. III.2.4 Services
The electricity sector recorded a sharp increase The slowdown in the services sector, which became
in H2:2016-17 on a y-o-y basis. Although thermal evident from Q1:2016-17, was sharper in H2:2016-
electricity production remained weak, non- 17. Some services sectors were adversely impacted
conventional sources such as solar and wind energy by demonetisation, albeit temporarily, especially
have registered higher production while pulling construction and realty. The implicit CSO data for Q4,
down the price. With India taking significant strides however, suggests that these effects to be waning.
in expanding non-conventional sources of energy, Steel consumption and cement production - lead
helped by an enabling policy environment, and with indicators of construction activity - remained positive
the expected improvement in the financial health from Q2:2016-17, although there was a sharp decline
of power distribution companies (DISCOMs) after in cement production since December (Chart III.13).
Chart III.12: Impact of Demonetisation

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
view of growing protectionist and anti-globalisation
sentiments in the US. As alluded to earlier, public
administration and defence continued to exhibit
robust growth throughout 2016-17 due to higher
expenditure on account of the 7th CPC award and
OROP. Given the commitment to fiscal consolidation,
however, double digit growth in these segments may
not sustain in 2017-18.
Overall, for the services sector, lead/coincident
indicators suggest some recovery in Q4 from a
prolonged downturn and the more immediate hit
from demonetisation.
III.3 Output Gap
The efficacy of monetary policy critically depends
on an accurate assessment of resource utilisation. In
this context, a good fix on potential output is vital
The government’s continuing thrust on building but challenging since it is unobservable. Estimation
infrastructure - as evident from a significant increase of potential output has to deal with uncertainty as
in both road projects awarded and constructed - real time measures of aggregate activity contain a
and rural housing, should revive the construction considerable amount of noise and are often subject
sector in the period ahead. Trade, hotels, transport to significant revisions. The introduction of a new
and communication are the other sectors, which base year for national accounts (2011-12) and the
are shrugging off the effects of demonetisation and continuing unavailability of a time series for previous
gearing up for a revival. Tourist arrivals have picked years for ensuring appropriate degrees of freedom in
econometric estimation are major impediments in this
up strongly in recent months. In the transport
endeavour. Demonetisation added some uncertainty
segment, major lead indicators such as commercial
to the growth outlook, but its impact was transitory.
and passenger vehicles sales have revived from the
lows of November/December 2016. For a fair assessment of the output gap for India, which
indicates deviation of actual output from its potential
Financial, real estate and business services have faced
level and expressed as percentage of potential
subdued conditions for the past four quarters as
output, the revised GVA data were augmented with
constraints on account of slowing bank credit pulled
forecasts applying different univariate filters such as
down its growth. Credit growth has continued to
the Hodrick-Prescott filter, the Baxter-King filter, the
remain tepid, although insurance premiums witnessed
Christiano-Fitzgerald filter and a Multivariate Kalman
a surge. The real estate segment, which largely reflects
(MKV) filter4. A MKV filter is particularly useful as
value addition by listed real estate companies, was
it juxtaposes demand conditions with movements
impacted by demonetisation as evident in a sharp fall
in the BSE realty index. Subsequently, these losses
4 Hodrick, R. J., & Prescott, E. C. (1997). “Postwar US Business Cycles: An
have been recouped as these transitory effects wore
Empirical Investigation” . Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, pp.1-16.
off. Baxter, M., & King, R. G. (1999).” Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate
Band-Pass Filters for Economic Time Series”. Review of Economics and
The business services segment largely reflects the Statistics, 81(4), pp.575-593.
Christiano, L. J., & Fitzgerald, T. J. (2003). “The Band Pass Filter.”
performance of IT companies. Sales and profit of
International Economic Review, 44(2), pp.435-465.
these companies remained robust. Nonetheless, the Beneš, J., Clinton, K., García-Saltos, R., Johnson, M., Laxton, D., Manchev, P.
B., & Matheson, T. (2010). “Estimating Potential Output with a Multivariate
outlook for this segment is clouded by uncertainty in Filter,” IMF Working Paper, WP/10/285.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
in inflationary pressures. The estimated output
gap measures were aggregated by using principal
components to get a composite measure, which
indicates that the output gap (actual minus potential),
is gradually closing (Chart III.14).
Growth prospects are expected to strengthen in 2017-
18 on account of several factors. First, discretionary
consumer demand held down by demonetisation is
expected to bounce back. Second, economic activity
in cash-intensive sectors such as retail trade, hotels
and restaurants, transportation as well as in the
unorganised sector is getting rapidly restored. Third,
demonetisation-induced ease in bank funding
conditions has led to a sharp improvement in
transmission of past policy rate reductions into
marginal cost-based lending rates, and in turn, to
lending rates for healthy borrowers, which should
spur a pick-up in both consumption and investment for 2017-18 on the rural economy and affordable
demand. Fourth, the emphasis in the Union Budget housing should also be positive for growth.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
IV. Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Domestic market segments were shaped by local factors in an environment of heightened volatility in global financial
markets. Large surplus liquidity in the money market post-demonetisation was managed with a mix of conventional
and unconventional instruments. Volatility in the foreign exchange market remained contained, notwithstanding
portfolio outflows. Credit growth, particularly to industry, remained depressed on asset quality concerns and weak
investment demand. Equity and debt markets exhibited episodic price movements before stabilising by the end of
the year.
Since the October 2016 Monetary Policy Report (MPR), to absorb surplus liquidity, the status quo on monetary
the appetite for risk in global financial markets has been policy by the Reserve Bank in December and the shift
punctuated by bouts of volatility triggered by the largely in the monetary policy stance in February 2017 to
unanticipated US presidential election results in neutral hardened yields. The rupee displayed two-way
November, apprehensions of intensified protectionist movements up to mid-January, but since then, it has
measures by the US, and monetary policy tightening appreciated on resumption of portfolio inflows in both
with unexpected hawkish guidance by the Fed in the debt and equity segments. Surplus liquidity
December. Thereafter, markets responded positively conditions impelled and lubricated the transmission
to the expectations of a significant reset of the policy of monetary impulses to deposit and lending rates.
mix in the US by the new administration sharpening However, credit growth, particularly to industry,
focus on the fiscal policy. The strengthening of the US remained sluggish on risk aversion by banks due to
dollar, hardening of bond yields, a surge in equity high levels of stressed assets and weak demand in view
markets on easing global deflation risks and a stronger of the depressed investment cycle and the presence of
growth outlook for advanced economies (AEs) triggered spare capacity in manufacturing.
capital outflows from emerging market economies
IV.1 Financial Markets
(EMEs). Consequently, fixed income markets and
exchange rates in EMEs came under pressure. Volatility IV.1.1 Money Market: In Q3 of 2016-17, the October
in markets of most EMEs, however, remained policy repo rate cut was transmitted fully in the money
contained, unlike during the taper tantrum. More market, amidst easy liquidity conditions. The
recently, EMEs have witnessed a resumption of unprecedented surge of liquidity after the
portfolio flows. announcement of demonetisation (details set out in
Section IV.3) shocked the market. The efficacy of
Domestic financial markets were impacted by twin
liquidity absorption operations by the Reserve Bank
shocks – demonetisation and the US presidential
can be gauged from the fact that the weighted average
election results. The Union Budget announcements,
call money rate (WACR) – the operating target of
the shift in the monetary policy stance of the Reserve
monetary policy – traded at only about 14 bps below
Bank and new data releases relating to inflation and
the repo rate between November 9, 2016 and end-
economic activity also influenced market movements.
December 2016; it coursed 6 bps below during October
Demonetisation drove a wall of liquidity into the money
2016 to November 8, 2016.
market. War-time liquidity management by the Reserve
Bank, however, limited the extent of softening of In Q4, the stepped-up pace of remonetisation resulted
money market rates relative to the policy repo rate in some reduction in the liquidity surplus, which was
within the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) corridor. still massive relative to the historical experience. A
G-sec yields moved in either direction, driven by calibrated change in the mix of instruments for
different factors. While the announcement of a policy liquidity absorption from open market operations
rate cut in October and demonetisation imparted a (OMOs) under the market stabilisation scheme (MSS)
softening bias, tightening of monetary policy in the US, to reverse repo operations under the Reserve Bank’s
application of the incremental cash reserve ratio (ICRR) LAF imparted a further softening bias to the WACR,

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
to the policy repo rate, which has spilled over to even
3-month money market rates, as discussed subsequently.
The 3-month treasury bill (T-bill) rate has often stayed
closer to the fixed reverse repo rate – or the floor of the
LAF corridor – rather than the policy repo rate.
Narrowing of the LAF corridor under such conditions
can help in finer alignment of the operating target to
the repo rate. This, in turn, could make overall money
market conditions more consistent with the monetary
policy stance.
Demonetisation-induced surplus liquidity conditions
also impacted the market micro structure, which had
a bearing on volumes and rates. In the call money
market, lending volumes of co-operative banks
increased significantly. Their share in average daily call
volumes rose to more than 50 per cent post-
demonetisation (up to February 2017), from the average
which traded at 25 bps below the repo rate, on average.
of 36 per cent during April-October 2016. These
The usual year-end liquidity pressure stemming from
reported trades, as opposed to the transaction-based
banks’ balance sheet adjustments and tax payments to
Negotiated Dealing System-Call (NDS-CALL) rates,
the Government did not spike money market rates, as
pulled down the overall WACR, especially during later
the post-demonetisation liquidity overhang remained
hours of the trading days. In the collateralised
substantial. Other overnight money market rates, viz.,
segments, mutual funds increased their lending in both
collateralised borrowing and lending obligation (CBLO)
the CBLO and market repo segments, enabled by large
and market repo, also traded in sync with the WACR,
mobilisation of short-term funds, and consequently,
albeit with a downside bias of about 35 bps (Chart IV.1).
collateralised rates traded below the WACR. Banks were
Country practices on the width of the policy corridor
active on the borrowing side in both the CBLO and
point to a considerable diversity, suggesting that the
market repo segments (accounting for about 74 per cent
choice of the width of the corridor is time- and country-
and 79 per cent of total daily average volumes,
specific (Table IV 1). In the Indian context, the recent
respectively, in February 2017), taking advantage of
overhang of large surplus liquidity – despite full
their lower cost of funds. Although many banks
absorption through the use of both conventional and
arbitraged between the various segments of the money
unconventional instruments – has imparted a market and the Reserve Bank’s LAF window, persistently
persistent downside bias to money market rates relative high structural surplus liquidity heavily weighed on
money market rates. Nonetheless, volatility in the
Table IV.1: Monetary Policy Interest Rate WACR estimated from an IGARCH1 (1,1) model has been
Corridors of Select Countries
muted (Chart IV.2).
Country Monetary Country Monetary
Policy Corridor Policy Corridor In view of surplus liquidity, banks reduced recourse to
Width (bps) Width (bps)
certificates of deposit (CDs), issuance of which declined
Australia 50 (+/- 25) Malaysia 50 (+/- 25)
sharply to `407 billion and `850 billon during Q3 and
Canada 50 (+/- 25) New Zealand 50 (+50/0)
Q4 (up to March 17, 2017) of 2016-17 as against `1,446
Euro System 65 (+25/-40) Philippines 100 (+/- 50)
India 100 (+/- 50) Sweden 150 (+/- 75)
Indonesia 150 (+/- 75) Thailand 100 (+/- 50)
1 To model time varying conditional volatility recognising persistence of
Japan 40 (+30/-10) United Kingdom 50 (+50/0)
shocks to volatility, an Integrated Generalised Autoregressive Conditional
Korea 200 (+/- 100) United States 50 (+50/0)
Heteroscedasticity (IGARCH) model is used which is a restricted version of
Sources: Central Bank websites of respective countries. the GARCH model, where the persistence parameters sum up to one.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
billion and `2,607 billion, respectively, during Q3 and yield curve shifted downwards. Later during the month,
Q4 of previous year (Chart IV.3). Liquidity also imparted however, yields moved up marginally tracking rising
a softening bias to the weighted average discount rates global yields on expectations of a Fed rate hike in
in primary issuance markets for commercial paper (CP). December 2016.
In the secondary markets, 3-month CD and 91-day T-bill
Second, G-sec yields softened significantly after the
rates softened by about 25 and 63 bps, respectively,
announcement of demonetisation and the resultant
while the 3-month CP rate declined by 30 bps.
surge of liquidity in the system (Chart IV.5). The yield
IV.1.2 Government Securities Market: Yields in the on the benchmark 10-year paper dropped from 6.80 per
government securities (G-sec) market remained volatile cent on November 8, 2016 to 6.19 per cent on November
in H2, induced by three major events (Chart IV.4). First, 24, 2016 (touching an intra-day low of 6.11 per cent on
November 25, 2016, i.e., below the policy repo rate).
G-sec yields softened in October 2016 following the 25
Yields aligned with the policy rate in the first week of
bps policy repo rate cut by the Reserve Bank and the

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
December 2016. Trading volumes in the secondary market (Chart IV.6). From October 2016 to January
market reached an all-time high of `2,051 billion on 2017, there were net FPI outflows of around `336
November 21, 2016. In the primary market, 91-day T-bill billion from the Indian G-sec market. Since February,
yields plummeted to 5.86 per cent on November 23, however, there have been net FPI inflows of about
2016. `229 billion.
Yields hardened in December 2016 due to a number of Fiscal developments had a bearing on G-sec yields
factors: imposition of incremental CRR to absorb during Q4. The Central Government reduced its market
surplus liquidity in the banking system; portfolio borrowings in Q4 of 2016-17 by `180 billion through
outflows from the debt market following the hike in dated securities and `510 billion through T-bills, which
interest rate by the US Fed accompanied by the hawkish reduced the supply of sovereign paper in the market.
statement about future rate hikes; expectations of fiscal The Government announced net market borrowings
stimulus in the US (which pushed up US bond yields); for 2017-18 in the Union Budget at `4,232 billion (BE),
rising crude oil prices; and the status quo on monetary which included planned buyback of securities of `750
policy announced by the Reserve Bank.
billion. The Union Budget has also provided for `250
Third, G-sec yields hardened in February 2017 and the billion for switching of securities, which is a debt
yield curve steepened in response to the unexpected management strategy that aims at reducing near-term
shift in the monetary policy stance of the Reserve Bank redemption pressure and elongating the maturity
from accommodative to neutral, higher CPI inflation of debt.
excluding food and fuel, and bunching of Ujwal
State Governments’ reliance on market borrowings for
DISCOM Assurance Yojana (UDAY) bonds with State
funding their fiscal deficit has increased steadily in
Development Loans (SDLs) issuances, as discussed
recent years. Large issuances of SDLs by States have
subsequently. The generic 10-year yield rose on the date
been exerting upward pressure on yields (Chart IV.7).
of announcement of the change in the monetary policy
The spread of SDLs cut-off over the 10-year G-sec
stance in February by 31 bps to 6.93 per cent. The
increased persistently in the second half of 2016-17 –
average daily closing of generic 10-year yield increased
from 28-49 bps in October 2016 to 86-114 bps in March
from 6.96 per cent in February 2017 to 7.13 per cent in
2017. As regards UDAY bonds, issuances during the
March 2017.
previous year were at a fixed spread of 75 bps over the
Higher domestic yields since February, inter alia, have corresponding/10-year FIMMDA G-sec yields. The
contributed to the return of portfolio flows to the debt spreads for issuances of UDAY bonds during 2016-17,

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
however, came down to the range of 35-75 bps,
following the modification in the issuance strategy to
invite bids from all the market participants.
IV.1.3 Corporate Bond Market: The corporate bond
yield (AAA 5-year benchmark) softened from 7.52 per
cent in October 2016 to 7.33 per cent in January 2017,
tracking the movements in G-sec yields on surplus
liquidity conditions after demonetisation. However,
after the February monetary policy announcement, the
corporate bond yield hardened to 7.65 per cent before
declining to 7.56 per cent at end-March 2017.
Taking advantage of low yields and tight credit market
conditions because of stressed assets in the banking
system, corporates mobilised higher resources from
the corporate bond market, i.e., `2,502 billion during
October 2016 – February 2017 as against `1,957 billion
during the corresponding period of the previous year
(i) enhancing the aggregate limit of partial credit
(Chart IV.8). Private placements constituted 97.8 per
enhancement (PCE) provided by banks to 50 per cent;
cent of the total amount mobilised. Indian corporates
(ii) permitting brokers in corporate bond repos; and (iii)
also raised large resources by way of bonds from
allowing consolidation and re-issuance of corporate
international markets (Chart IV.9).
bonds. The turnover in the corporate bond market (in
Foreign portfolio investment in the corporate bond
terms of amount) increased by 63.8 per cent during H2,
market declined during November 2016 to January 2017
which was a record high. In US dollar terms, the
on account of risk-off strategies followed by international
turnover increased from US$ 6.0 billion in H2:2015-16
investors. Portfolio flows turned positive from February
to US$ 9.7 billion in H2: 2016-17.
due to global risk-on portfolio shifts and also to take
advantage of higher domestic yields. Several measures IV.1.4 Stock Market: The stock market (BSE Sensex)
were announced to deepen the corporate bond market: gained by 6.3 per cent in H2:2016-17 (Chart IV.10). In

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
October 2016, the stock market remained volatile due in March, which was already priced in by markets, the
to factors such as increasing prospects of an interest dovish stance improved appetite for risk assets,
rate hike by the US Fed in December and consequent including in EMEs. On expectations that the State
portfolio outflows, and mixed corporate results for Q2. election results would provide the impetus for reforms,
Following the 25 bps cut in the repo rate by the Reserve the BSE Sensex (29,974) and Nifty (9,265) closed at all
Bank in October 2016, it gained modestly. During time highs on April 5, 2017.
November 2016, the BSE Sensex plunged by 4.6 per
IV.1.5 Foreign Exchange Market: In the foreign
cent on uncertainty over the impact of demonetisation
exchange market, the rupee moved in a narrow range
on economic growth and corporate earnings and also
against the US dollar and appreciated against the euro
portfolio equity outflows triggered by the risk-off
and pound sterling in H2 of 2016-17 (Chart IV.11). In
market reactions to the US presidential election results.
Q3, the weakness of the rupee against the US dollar
Demonetisation had a relatively greater impact on cash
mainly reflected the strengthening of the dollar
sensitive sectors such as FMCG, consumer durables,
following the US presidential election outcome; FPI
auto and realty vis-a-vis the overall Sensex. The
outflows (both in equity and debt); increased demand
downward bias persisted during December on sustained
from oil importers for foreign currency; FCNR(B)
selling by foreign institutional investors, subdued auto
redemption pressures; and the policy rate cut in
sales data for November, persisting concerns about Q3
October 2016. The US dollar strengthened in anticipation
earnings, and the interest rate increase by the US Fed
of an expansionary fiscal policy and tighter monetary
but with unexpected hawkish guidance.
policy by the Fed. Consequently, the rupee depreciated
The stock market revived in January 2017 due to value
against the US dollar by 2.9 per cent (from `66.71 per
buying by domestic institutional investors, better than
US dollar on November 8 to `68.72 on November 28).
expected quarterly corporate results for Q3, revival of
The rupee regained about half of the lost ground by the
foreign portfolio equity investment from mid-January
first week of December 2016, but came under renewed
and positive cues from global markets. The recovery
downward pressure till end-January 2017 in response
continued in February 2017 on proposals made in the
to the Fed policy rate hike.
Union Budget, particularly a lower fiscal deficit target
for 2017-18, exemption of category I and category II From February 2017 onwards, the rupee has appreciated
foreign portfolio investors from taxation on indirect due to equity portfolio inflows on policy announcements
transfers, and an unchanged capital gains tax rate for made in the Union Budget and easing of concerns about
the capital market. FPIs stepped up buying following
the status quo maintained by the US Fed and positive
cues from global equity markets. The impact of
demonetisation on sectoral indices was transitory as
they have recovered their losses and scaled higher than
their pre-demonetisation levels.
In March, the stock market gained further on better than
expected Q3 GDP growth estimates in India released by
the CSO, PMI for both manufacturing and services for
the month of February pointing to expansion after the
demonetisation-induced contraction, and approval of
the draft Central GST (CGST) and Integrated GST (IGST)
bills by the GST Council.2 Despite the Fed rate increase
2 This marked a crucial step in the run up to the planned introduction of
GST by July 1, 2017, which will replace the existing numerous central and
state taxes.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Table IV.2: Nominal and Real Effective Exchange
Rates: Trade-Based (Base: 2004-05=100)
Item Index: Appreciation (+) /
March Depreciation (-) (per cent)
31,
2017 Mar 31, 2017 Mar 31, 2017
(P) over over
Mar 31, 2016 Sep 30, 2016
36-currency REER 119.3 7.9 4.2
36-currency NEER 78.3 6.3 5.2
6-currency REER 132.2 7.8 5.0
6-currency NEER 70.8 6.3 6.1
`/ US$ (As on March 31, 2017) 64.8 2.3 2.8
P: Provisional.
Note: REER figures are based on Consumer Price Index (Combined).
Source: RBI.
the speed of Fed policy rate hikes. Factors such as
India’s low current account deficit, the emphasis of
monetary policy on the 4 per cent inflation target, the
per cent by March 17, 2017. Several factors, however,
transient impact of demonetisation on economic
overstate this slowdown. As outlined in the October
activity, and the commitment to fiscal prudence
2016 MPR, credit flows were impacted by loan write-offs
announced in the Union Budget provided stability to
and swapping of bank credit into special securities
the exchange rate. The rupee gained further in March
under the UDAY (Chart IV.12). In addition, the use of
as FPI inflows, especially equity, were boosted by the
specified bank notes (SBNs) for repaying loans would
outcome of State elections, which augur well for
have also dampened the growth rate of bank credit.
accelerating the pace of reforms.
From the demand side, a depressed investment cycle,
In terms of both 36-currency nominal effective persisting excess capacity in manufacturing, and
exchange rate (NEER) and real effective exchange rate deleveraging on the part of corporates to improve their
(REER), the rupee appreciated by 6.3 per cent and 7.9 credit ratings (as explained in Chapter III) have
per cent, respectively, between end-March 2017 and contributed to the slowdown in credit growth.
end-March 2016 (Table IV.2).
The deceleration in credit growth also highlights the
IV.1.6 Credit Market: In the credit market, y-o-y growth role of supply side factors – stressed assets and capital
in non-food credit decelerated through H2 to a low of constraint – in hindering a revival in the credit cycle
4.7 per cent in early January before picking up to 5.1 (Box IV.1 and Chart IV.13).
Box IV.1: Stressed Assets, Capital Constraints and Supply of Credit
The “capital crunch hypothesis”, i.e., capital constrained is the endogenous money view, which indicates that
banks cutting back on lending, was highlighted as a key banks can always fully meet the demand for loans from
factor that worsened the US recession in the early 1990s all credit-worthy borrowers, and no funding constraint
(Bernanke and Lown, 1991). Since then, theoretical and (posed by the composition of liabilities in terms of
empirical literature has firmly established the role of equity versus debt) can prevent banks from doing so.
a “capital channel” that operates from the supply side This macro view is in sync with the Modigliani and
of credit, as opposed to the typical focus of monetary Miller argument on the irrelevance of capital structure
policy transmission on the demand side (Rivera, 2015). as applied to banks, i.e., the composition of liabilities
of banks should not influence the price and quantity
Two arguments are highlighted in the debate on the role
of credit.
of bank capital in conditioning the credit cycle. First
(contd...)

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Second, the post-Keynesian emphasis on credit (CRAR) significantly influence credit growth. While
rationing under which borrowers, that cannot meet better capitalised banks exhibit higher credit growth,
tighter credit standards set by banks (say, amidst a banks with higher GNPAs experience weaker credit
recession or heightened uncertainty that may change growth (Table 1).
the risk assessment of banks), fail to access credit.
Low net interest margin (NIM) is an indicator of
Thus, not all demand for credit is met. When banks
efficient intermediation. However, when faced with
face a loss of confidence (arising, for example from
large stressed assets, banks may either (i) strive to
unanticipated large increase in stressed assets), they
maintain/increase their NIMs and/or (ii) reduce supply
need more capital to bolster their loss absorbing
of credit. Panel data (quarterly data of 72 banks for the
capacity. Raising capital from equity holders, however,
period Q2 of 2010 to Q4 of 2016) regression results
becomes difficult, costlier and unattractive in such a
suggest that credit risk proxied by the stressed assets
situation, forcing banks to deleverage instead. This may
(i.e., restructured assets plus gross NPAs) to total
also reflect the natural eventual outcome of the lack
assets ratio has a positive and statistically significant
of market and regulatory discipline and the tendency
relationship with NIM of banks as a percentage of
to evergreen bad loans. An adverse feedback loop sets
their total assets (Table 2). Regression results also
in, under which inadequate capital leads to cut backs
indicate that one (positive) standard deviation shock
on lending to viable projects. In turn, this deepens a
to stressed assets could lead to about 0.15 standard
recession, which increases stressed assets and reduces
deviation increase in NIM.
capital further.
Using panel data for the Indian banking system Table 2: Determinants of Net Interest Margin
(quarterly data of 66 banks for the period Q1 of 2009
AB – Difference GMM AB – System GMM
to Q4 of 2016) and applying four different models (i.e.,
NIM(-1) 0.542* 0.568*
fixed effects, random effects, difference and system
Stressed Assets 0.011* 0.008*
generalised method of moments (GMM) following CRAR 0.003* 0.003*
Arellano-Bond/Bond-Bover) to check for the robustness Bank Fixed Effects No Yes
No of observations 1944 1944
of estimates, it is found that the gross non-performing
Notes:
assets (GNPA) and capital to risk weighted assets ratio
NIM = (Interest income minus interest expense) to total assets (in per cent).
Stressed assets = (Restructured assets plus gross NPAs) to total assets (in
per cent).
Table 1: Determinants of Bank Lending The regressions are controlled for seasonality, credit growth, bank size,
(Dependent variable: Δlcredit ) return on assets, operating expense, non -interest income, investment in SLR
securities, GVA growth and inflation.
Hansen test for over identification restrictions and Arellano-Bond test for
Random Fixed Effect AB- Diff. AB-System
Effect Model Model GMM GMM residual auto correlations are found to be satisfactory.
*:Significant at 1% level.
Δlcredit -0.12*** -0.15** -0.18* -0.15**
t-1
(-1.7) (-2.2) (-3.0) (-2.1) It is observed that banks could protect their NIM up to
gnpa -0.64* -0.64* -0.56* -0.63* Q3:2014-15. Thereafter, however, their NIM declined,
t
(-7.6) (-5.1) (-4.5) (-7.5)
which also coincided with the sustained deceleration in
crar 0.16* 0.25* 0.36** 0.16*
t credit growth. After the Asset Quality Review initiated
(5.9) (5.3) (3.3) (6.0)
No. of 1848 1848 1782 1848 in April 2015, decline in income associated with the
Observations
explicit recognition of NPAs lowered the NIM. This
ar1 (p-value) 0.01 0.01
amplified risk aversion and led to further deceleration
ar2 (p-value) 0.20 0.30
Hansen (p-value) 1.00 1.00 of credit growth.
Notes: References:
Δlcredit: credit growth (q-o-q); gnpa: gross non-performing assets to advances
ratio; crar: capital to risk weighted assets ratio. Bernanke, Ben S and Cara S Lown (1991), “The Credit
Estimations are controlled for seasonality, nominal GVA growth, return on
Crunch”, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 2.
equity and repo rate adjustments.
Figures in parentheses are z-statistics;
Rivera, Alvaro Santos (2015), “Bank Capital and
ar1 and ar2 are tests for first-order and second-order serial correlation,
respectively. Endogenous Money: Liquidity Preference and Capital
Hansen tests are for checking the over-identifying restrictions for the GMM
estimators. Constraints as Determinants of Credit Rationing”, ECB,
*,**,***: Significant at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. October.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
However, the overall flow of financial resources to the
commercial sector in 2016-17 (up to mid-March) was
lower than in the corresponding period of the previous
year due to lower lending from banks. Among non-bank
sources, funding from foreign sources increased due
to marginally higher FDI inflows and a sharp increase
in short-term credit. Financing through domestic
sources increased primarily due to higher funding from
NBFCs, subscription to commercial paper by non-banks
and private placement by non-financial entities,
notwithstanding diminished public issues (Table IV.3).
IV.2 Monetary Policy Transmission
Monetary policy transmission strengthened in H2 of
2016-17, aided by the surfeit of liquidity. The share of
low cost current account and savings account (CASA)
deposits in aggregate deposits with the SCBs went up
Sectoral data on flow of credit indicate that deceleration
to 39.2 per cent (as on March 17, 2017) – an increase
in credit, though broad-based, was characterised by a
of 4.0 percentage points relative to the pre-
sharp contraction in exposure to industry (Chart IV.14). demonetisation period. Given the prevailing risk
There was decline in credit in 12 of the 18 major aversion, banks reduced their term deposit rates. The
industry sub-groups on a y-o-y basis as of February 2017. median term deposit rate and the weighted average
While the availability of funding from banks remained domestic term deposit rate (WADTDR) fell by 37 bps
weak, the flow of credit from NBFCs3 during the first and 32 bps, respectively, during November 2016-March
three quarters of 2016-17 was about 50 per cent higher 2017.4 Combined with the sharp increase in CASA
than in the whole of 2015-16 (Chart IV.15). deposits, the overall cost of borrowings declined,
3 Data pertain to loans and advances extended by about 400 NBFCs (NBFCs-D and NBFCs-ND-SI that submit quarterly returns to RBI) and adjusted for their
borrowings from banks, financial institutions and through CPs.
4 WADTDR pertains to November 2016 to February 2017.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Table IV.3: Flow of Financial Resources to the Commercial Sector
(` billion)
Item April 1 to March 17
2015-16 2016-17
` billion % of Total ` billion % of Total
A. Adjusted Non-food Bank Credit (NFC) 7,754 54.8 4,818 38.2
i) Non-Food Credit 7,024 49.6 3,655 29.0
ii) Non-SLR Investment by SCBs 731 5.2 1,164 9.2
B. Flow from Non-banks (B1+B2) 6,403 45.2 7,802 61.8
B1. Domestic Sources 4,479 31.6 5,511 43.7
1 Public issues by non-financial entities @ 363 2.6 120 1.0
2 Gross private placements by non-financial entities @ 985 7.0 1,599 12.7
3 Net issuance of CPs subscribed to by non-banks 1,173 8.3 1,467 11.6
4 Net Credit by housing finance companies # 706 5.0 849 6.7
5 Total accommodation by the 4 RBI regulated All India Financial Institutions @ 459 3.2 218 1.7
6 NBFCs-D and NBFCs-ND-SI (net of borrowings from banks/FIs/CPs) # 583 4.1 1,027 8.1
7 LIC's net investment in corporate debt, infrastructure and social sector * 210 1.5 230 1.8
B2. Foreign Sources 1,924 13.6 2,290 18.1
1 External Commercial Borrowings / FCCB @ -329 -2.3 -412 -3.3
2 ADR/GDR Issues excluding banks and financial institutions @ 0 0.0 0 0.0
3 Short-term credit from abroad # -274 -1.9 167 1.3
4 Foreign Direct Investment to India * 2,527 17.8 2,535 20.1
C. Total Flow of Resources (A+B) 14,157 100.0 12,620 100.0
Note: Data are provisional. #: Up to December. *:Up to January. @: Up to February.
Sources: RBI, LIC, NABARD and SEBI.
creating space for banks to cut their marginal cost of March 2017), 27 public sector banks have reduced their
funds based lending rates (MCLRs). The one-year one-year median MCLR in the range of 50 to 105 bps,
median MCLR declined by a cumulative 70 bps since and 19 private sector banks have done so in the range
November 2016, even as the policy rate remained of 25 to 148 bps.
unchanged. This is significant, given that the decline
In comparison with deposit rates and the MCLR,
during the preceding seven months (April-October
transmission to actual lending rates has been less
2016) – when the repo rate was cut by 50 bps – was
complete during the post-demonetisation period.
only 15 bps (Chart IV.16). Post-demonetisation (up to
During November 2016 – February 2017, the weighted
average lending rate (WALR) of banks in respect of fresh
rupee loans declined by 69 bps, whereas the WALR on
outstanding rupee loans declined by 13 bps only over
the same period. Transmission to lending rates for
outstanding rupee loans vis-à-vis fresh rupee loans has
been limited essentially on account of two factors. First,
a major portion of loans contracted prior to the
introduction of MCLR (i.e., April, 2016) has continued
to be priced at the base rate5; in fact, loans contracted
at the base rate still constitute about 67 per cent of
banks’ loan portfolios. Second, even under the MCLR-
based pricing of credit, the interest rate is typically reset
on the existing loans on an annual basis, implying that
most loans under the MCLR regime contracted up to
5 Individual borrowers can, however, migrate to MCLR based pricing of loans
from erstwhile BPLR/base rate based pricing on mutually acceptable terms.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
December 2016 would not have benefited from the interest rates. Although the government has announced
sharp reduction in the MCLR. to revise the interest rates on small savings in line with
the change in G-sec yields, this is not fully implemented
An analysis of factors hindering transmission using
(Box IV.2).
quarterly bank level data (for the first three quarters of
2016-17) suggested the presence of a positive correlation IV.3 Liquidity Conditions and the Operating
between the spread (i.e., WALR on outstanding/fresh Procedure of Monetary Policy
rupee loans over MCLR) and stressed assets of banks,
The amended RBI Act 1934 requires the Reserve Bank
implying that banks charge additional risk premiums
to place the operating procedure relating to the
on their performing assets to compensate for the
implementation of monetary policy and changes
interest income losses from NPAs. Among the various
thereto from time to time, if any, in the public domain.
components of the MCLR, it is only the term deposit
This operating procedure – embodied in the Reserve
rates that are seen to respond to the changes in policy
Bank’s liquidity management framework – was
rate.
published in Box IV.I of the April 2015 MPR. The
Another factor which has impeded monetary policy operating procedure is guided by the objective of
transmission is the interest rates on small savings aligning the operating target of monetary policy – the
which are not in alignment with movements in market weighted average call money rate (WACR) – to the repo
Box IV.2: Transmission to Small Savings Rates
Although G-sec yields (10-year maturity) declined This spread between the actual rate of interest and
through 2016-17 (by about 79 bps), small savings the formula based interest rate increased to a range
rates remained unchanged for Q2 and Q4:2016-17, of 61 to 95 bps in Q1:2017-18 for different savings
and were reduced only by 10 bps each for Q3:2016- instruments (Table). The wide spread between small
17 and Q1:2017-18. At the time of the introduction of savings rates and bond yields makes small savings
the formula based reset of rates linked to G-sec yields more attractive vis-à-vis bank deposits and discourages
for Q1:2016-17, interest rates on small savings were banks to fully adjust their deposit interest rates on
broadly aligned to the interest rates derived from the fear of losing deposits, thereby hampering monetary
formula for fixing the interest rate on small savings. transmission.
Table: Interest Rates on Small Savings Instruments for Q1: 2017-18
Small Savings Scheme Maturity Spread Average G-sec Formula** based GoI announced Difference
(years) (Percentage yield (Per cent) rate of interest rate of interest (Percentage
point)** of corresponding (Per cent) (Per cent) point)
maturity (Dec 2016 (applicable to (applicable to
to Feb 2017) * Apr- Jun 2017) Apr-Jun 2017)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (3) + (4) (6) (7) = (6) - (5)
Savings Deposits - - - - 4.0 -
Public Provident Fund 15 0.25 6.99 7.24 7.9 0.66
Term Deposits
1 Year 1 0 6.09 6.09 6.9 0.81
2 Year 2 0 6.20 6.20 7.0 0.80
3 Year 3 0 6.31 6.31 7.2 0.89
5 Year 5 0.25 6.54 6.79 7.7 0.91
Post Office Recurring Deposit Account 5 0 6.31 6.31 7.2 0.89
Post Office Monthly Income Scheme 5 0.25 6.50 6.75 7.6 0.85
Kisan Vikas Patra 113 Months 0 6.99 6.99 7.6 0.61
NSC VIII issue 5 0.25 6.70 6.95 7.9 0.95
Senior Citizens Saving Scheme 5 1.00 6.54 7.54 8.4 0.86
Sukanya Samriddhi Account Scheme 21 0.75 6.99 7.74 8.4 0.66
*: Compounding frequency varies across instruments.
** : As announced by the Government of India on February 16, 2016.
Source: Government of India.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
rate through active liquidity management, consistent
with the stance of monetary policy. The framework was
modified in April 2016, details of which were presented
in the October 2016 MPR. Consistent with the assurance
given on proactive management of both permanent and
frictional liquidity under the modified liquidity
management framework of April 2016, and the
guidance of moving the system from an average deficit
equivalent to one per cent of net demand and time
liabilities (NDTL) to a position of neutrality, the Reserve
Bank injected permanent liquidity to the tune of `1.9
trillion during April-October 2016, primarily through
open market purchase auctions of `1.1 trillion. The
balance reflected the liquidity impact of forex market
operations of the Reserve Bank and repurchase of
securities by the Government.
Following the announcement of demonetisation on
November 8, 2016 and the subsequent surge in bank The ICRR was in place for one fortnight (ended on
deposits, the Reserve Bank expanded the range of December 9, 2016). It helped in draining excess liquidity
instruments for absorbing a record level of surplus from the system to the extent of about `4,000 billion.
liquidity. At the beginning of Q3, injection of permanent With the enhancement of the limit on issuance of
liquidity consistent with the assurance given under the
securities under the MSS from `300 billion to `6,000
modifications to liquidity management framework in
billion on December 2, 2016 by the Central Government,
April 2016, had already moved the system to an average
the Reserve Bank withdrew the ICRR. Thereafter, it
surplus of `293 billion in Q2. As cash balances of the
managed surplus liquidity conditions through the use
government increased and festival related currency
of fine tuning reverse repos and the MSS. In Q4,
demand drained liquidity out of the banking system,
remonetisation progressed at an accelerated pace, with
the average system wide surplus declined to `63 billion
currency in circulation increasing cumulatively by about
in October. After demonetisation, currency in
`4,373 billion (Chart IV.18). This reduced the liquidity
circulation declined by `8,997 billion (up to January 6,
surplus in the system to `3,141 billion by end-March 2017.
2017).
This sudden increase in liquidity in the banking system,
coupled with the weak demand for credit (as explained
in Section IV.1), necessitated a significant step up in
the liquidity absorption operations by the Reserve Bank
so that money market rates remained consistent with
the policy repo rate. The Reserve Bank used a mix of
both conventional and unconventional instruments,
viz., (i) temporary application of an ICRR of 100 per
cent on the increase in NDTL of banks between
September 16 and November 11, 2016; (ii) open market
sales of cash management bills (CMBs) issued under
the MSS to manage the large surplus liquidity; and
(iii) variable rate reverse repos of various tenors
(Chart IV.17). The peak level of liquidity absorbed
reached `7,956 billion on January 4, 2017 (`2,568 billion
absorbed through reverse repos and `5,466 billion
through CMBs under the MSS).

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
In anticipation of the liquidity surplus declining further (SLR) position of banks was about 11 per cent on an
due to remonetisation, the Reserve Bank increasingly average in Q4 of 2016-17 (up to February), which
resorted to reverse repo operations to absorb the included investment in CMBs under the MSS and excess
surplus liquidity released by maturing CMBs, especially liquidity parked with the Reserve Bank under reverse
from January 14, 2017. The Reserve Bank absorbed daily repo operations (Chart IV.20).
average surplus liquidity of `4,024 billion in Q3 (after
Looking ahead, liquidity conditions are expected to
demonetisation) and `5,932 billion in Q4. This ensured
remain in surplus in the short-run, which the Reserve
the alignment of the WACR with the policy repo rate,
Bank would continue to modulate so that money
albeit with a soft bias.
market rates remain consistent with the operating
Post-demonetisation, currency in circulation contracted target and the stance of monetary policy. Progressively
as SBNs were returned by the public and correspondingly, greater use of term reverse repos to absorb the surplus
deposits with banks increased sharply (Chart IV.19). liquidity should contribute to the development of the
Although a sharp moderation in the currency deposit term money market. The change in the monetary policy
ratio led to an increase in the money multiplier, it could stance from accommodative to neutral in February 2017
not offset the impact of the contraction in base money has altered market expectations, but the transmission
(by about 22 per cent as on March 17, 2017 from the of past cumulative 175 bps cut in the repo rate to
period immediately prior to demonetisation) on broad lending rates remains incomplete. Resolution of
money (M ). Structural surplus liquidity enabled banks stressed assets and recapitalisation of public sector

to meet the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) requirement, banks will be critical to ease risk aversion by banks.
which was tightened from 70 per cent to 80 per cent This will enhance the flow of credit to productive
in January 2017. The excess statutory liquidity ratio sectors and also improve monetary policy transmission.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
V. External Environment
Global economic activity and trade picked up modestly from the later part of 2016. The firming up of commodity
prices led to some uptick in inflation in major advanced economies (AEs). Recessionary conditions ebbed in key
commodity exporting emerging market economies (EMEs), setting the stage for a turnaround in EMEs as a group.
Since the MPR of October 2016, global growth picked a large slippage in net exports, even though retail
up modestly towards end-2016, and is projected to sales, consumer confidence and the purchasing
improve further in 2017 by multilateral agencies. manufacturers’ index (PMI) suggested sustained
Growth in EMEs moderated in 2016, but is set to momentum. Domestic demand grew (q-o-q) at the
improve with the ebbing of recessionary conditions fastest pace in almost two years. Consumer confidence
in key commodity exporting countries. Even though reached a 16-year high in March, though retail sales
world trade appeared to have emerged out of a trough, had slowed down in February. The Institute for Supply
new risks have emerged from an increasing tendency Management’s (ISM) index suggested manufacturing
towards protectionist policies and heightened expanded at its fastest pace in three years in February.
political tensions. Commodity prices have risen since
In the Euro area, GDP growth accelerated in H2:2016.
late 2016 on improvement in US economic indicators
Relatively low oil prices and sustained employment
such as strong labour market and consumer spending;
gains have provided support to household incomes.
infrastructure spending in China; and geopolitical
Improving consumer confidence and the PMI, which
concerns. Crude oil prices firmed after the OPEC
rose to a six-year high in March, indicate that activity
announced curtailment of production. Inflation edged
continued to expand in Q1:2017. Nonetheless, the
up on expectations of reflationary fiscal policies in the
region remains vulnerable to a number of headwinds
US, rising energy prices and a mild strengthening of
such as the formal beginning of the Brexit process,
demand.
upcoming elections in several constituent countries
International financial markets were impacted by and tightening of financial conditions.
the US election results and expectations of monetary
The Japanese economy continued to recover at a
policy tightening by the Federal Reserve, underpinned
modest pace even as the momentum weakened in
by hawkish forward guidance. Financial markets in
H2:2016. Increases in private consumption and fixed
EMEs briefly turned volatile after the US election
investment were moderate, although there was some
due to large capital outflows leading to plunges in
uptick in exports and industrial production towards
currency and equity markets. Nevertheless, average
end-2016. The manufacturing PMI improved during
volatility remained contained by historical standards
January and February but moderated again in March
since Q4:2016. Bond yields hardened across the globe
2017.
in tandem with US yields, before softening somewhat
In the UK, economic growth gained momentum in H2:
since mid-March. Strengthening of the US economy
2016, notwithstanding the uncertainties surrounding
further buoyed the equity markets, while the
the negotiations relating to Brexit, as exports rose
increasing likelihood of more rate hikes by the Federal
substantially following the weakening of the pound.
Reserve in 2017 hardened bond yields in AEs. The US
However, manufacturing growth weakened for two
dollar appreciated to a multi-year high in December
consecutive months in February, indicating the
and remained bullish.
possibility of a slowdown in 2017 (Table V.1).
V.1 Global Economic Conditions
Economic activity in EMEs continued to be divergent.
The US economy bounced back strongly in Q3:2016,
In China, even though y-o-y GDP growth improved
underpinned by robust consumer spending and
in Q4:2016, supported by policy stimulus and the
continuing improvement in the labour market.
rising property market, q-o-q growth showed a sharp
GDP growth decelerated sharply in Q4:2016 due to
loss of momentum. Industrial production and PMI

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
has eased in Russia, with the improvement in the
Table V.1: Real GDP Growth (q-o-q, saar)
mining and manufacturing sectors, rise in oil prices
(Per cent)
and policy initiatives that included a more flexible
Country Q4- Q1- Q2- Q3- Q4- 2017 2018
exchange rate and bank recapitalisation. In South
2015 2016 2016 2016 2016 (P) (P)
Korea, Thailand and Mexico, GDP growth lost some
Advanced Economies (AEs)
momentum in Q3 and Q4:2016. According to the IMF,
US 0.9 0.8 1.4 3.5 2.1 2.3 2.5
Euro area 2.0 2.0 1.2 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 growth in both AEs and EMEs will pick up in 2017.
Japan -1.0 1.9 2.2 1.2 1.2 0.8 0.5 The OECD’s composite leading indicators (CLIs)
UK 2.8 0.8 2.4 2.0 2.8 1.5 1.4
point to growth accelerating in the US, Japan, China,
Canada 0.5 2.7 -1.2 3.8 2.6 1.9 2.0
Korea 2.8 2.0 3.6 2.0 2.0 3.0 3.1 Brazil and Russia, stable momentum in the Euro
Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) area and tentative signs of emerging momentum in
China 6.0 5.2 7.6 7.2 6.8 6.5 6.0 the UK. However, manufacturing activity remains
Brazil -4.8 -2.4 -1.3 -2.9 -3.6 0.2 1.5
weak in some countries as underscored by the PMIs
Russia* -3.2 -0.4 -0.5 -0.4 0.3 1.1 1.2
South Africa 0.5 -1.5 3.1 0.4 -0.3 0.8 1.6 (Chart V.1).
Thailand 2.5 4.3 4.2 1.7 1.7 3.3 3.1
Malaysia 4.8 4.0 2.8 5.6 5.6 4.6 4.7 World trade growth improved in Q4:2016, largely
Mexico 1.6 1.9 0.4 4.2 2.8 1.7 2.0
supported by EMEs as imports by AEs moderated. In
Saudi Arabia* 4.3 2.0 1.5 0.9 1.2 0.4 2.3
January 2017, exports rebounded sharply in China
Memo:
and Brazil. Exports also increased in some East Asian
2016 2017 2018
(E) (P) (P) economies. Merchandise and services trade improved
World Output 3.1 3.4 3.6 (in nominal terms), although it remained below its
World Trade Volume 1.9 3.8 4.1 long-term average (Chart V.2).
E : Estimate, P : Projection, *: y-o-y growth.
The IMF and the World Bank project higher growth
Sources: Bloomberg and IMF.
in world trade volumes in 2017. The World Trade
Outlook Indicator of the World Trade Organisation
stabilised, but there are rising concerns about high
(WTO) and the global PMI for new export orders
indebtedness and financial stability. Consequently,
also indicate strengthening of world trade growth
the growth target for 2017 has been reduced to
momentum in Q1:2017. There are, however, several
about 6.5 per cent by the government. In Brazil, the
downside risks emanating from heightened policy
economic situation seems to have improved with the
uncertainty in the US and the UK from proposals to
rise in commodity prices and several measures such
retreat from multilateral/regional trade agreements,
as reforming the bankruptcy law announced by the
raising of tariffs and non-tariff barriers and consequent
authorities to revive growth. Economic contraction retaliation. Furthermore, the medium-term trade

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
outlook is expected to remain weak and is unlikely to trade. The recovery in world trade could, however,
revert to its pre-crisis level as several structural factors diverge significantly across various regional blocs (Box
have led to a decline in the income elasticity of world V.1).
Box V.1: Global Economic Activity and Trade: A New Normal?
Since the second half of 2011, global trade growth activity has diminished. The interplay of these factors
has remained slower than the expansion in world suggests that the relationship between growth and
GDP, while in the 25 years before the global financial trade may be approaching a new normal (ECB, 2016).
crisis, trade growth was twice the GDP growth. Thus,
Following Constantinescu et al. (2015), an error
the income elasticity of trade has fallen sharply in
correction model (ECM) on monthly data for the period
the post-crisis years. Two main developments with
January 2000 to July 2016 was specified as follows:
roughly equivalent contributions, viz., compositional
effects and structural factors, have been the driving
forces in the slowdown in trade vis-à-vis economic where Δ denotes first difference, m is world trade
t
growth. volume and y is income represented by world IIP, is
t
a constant, and is the error term. The short-run trade
Compositional effects include shift in economic t
elasticity is represented by , while the long-run trade
activity and trade from AEs towards EMEs, the
elasticity is given by – .
declining share of the import-intensive component of
global demand and shift in trade from manufacturing Bai-Perron tests suggest at least three regimes in the
to services. These factors may not necessarily be model, viz., January 2000 to October 2008; November
structural and could revert in the medium-term when 2008 to April 2011; and May 2011 to July 2016, broadly
the global economy recovers fully. coinciding with the pre-crisis period, the crisis period
and the post-crisis period. Over the three regimes, the
Structural factors, which set in well before the global
long-run elasticity continuously declined from 1.9 to
recession, reflect fundamental shifts working through
0.8. As for the short-term elasticity, it increased sharply
at least three channels. First, lower transportation
to 0.9 during the crisis period from 0.5 in the pre-crisis
costs, removal of trade barriers and increase
period, before falling to 0.4 in the succeeding regime.
in multilateral global trade agreements, which
Thus, global trade is unlikely to grow as fast as in the
contributed to expansion in global trade, have waned.
past even when global growth recovers fully in the
Second, global value chains (GVCs) have slowed
medium-term.
down sharply, partly due to rising labour costs in
However, recovery in regional trade growth could
EMEs and partly on account of rising protectionism.
diverge significantly as shown by a VAR analysis.1 The
Third, financial deepening which facilitated export
(contd.)
1 It consists of two endogenous variables (world IIP growth and corresponding region trade growth) with three lags based on lag length selection criteria.
All variables are seasonally adjusted using X12 ARIMA and in log difference form.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
impulse response functions (IRFs) of trade to a shock References:
to world IIP growth show: (i) the impact is more on
Cristina Constantinescu, Aaditya Mattoo, and Michele
AEs than EMEs; (ii) among AEs, the impact is most
Ruta (2015), “The Global Trade Slowdown: Cyclical or
on Japan, followed by the US and the Euro area; and
Structural?”, IMF Working Paper, WP/15/6.
(iii) among EMEs, the impact is most in Latin America
but highly fluctuating, while Africa and the Middle East European Central Bank (2016), “Understanding the
are the least affected (Charts a and b). Weakness in Global Trade: What is the new normal?”,
Occasional Paper Series, No 178.
V.2 Commodity Prices and Global Inflation also put downward pressure on crude oil prices as
there is generally an inverse relationship between US
Global supply/demand conditions and expectations of
dollar and oil prices. This is also borne out by recent
a faster pace of economic recovery continued to drive
data from January 1, 2013 to March 31, 2017, which
commodity prices. Crude oil prices rose to a multi-
show significant negative correlation of 0.94 between
year high in December 2016 after OPEC members
dollar index and crude oil prices (WTI, Brent and
agreed to cut production in end-November 2016
Dubai Fateh).
(Chart V.3). Since then, crude oil prices have remained
largely range bound as shale production is expected to Prices of base metals were also bolstered markedly
increase on the back of a higher oil rig count in the US during November and December 2016 by strong
(Chart V.4a). Demand may, however, remain subdued demand from China and expectation of higher
without a sharp turnaround in growth of major oil infrastructure spending in the US as proposed by
importing EMEs. Strengthening of the US dollar may the new administration. The Food and Agriculture

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Organisation (FAO) food price index, which had targets in most AEs. In the US, inflation sequentially
moderated during Q4:2016, increased markedly in the accelerated in November and December to reach a
first two months of 2017, primarily driven by cereal level that was the highest since September 2014.
prices. However, core personal consumption expenditure
(PCE) inflation remained stable at around 1.8 per
Gold prices fell significantly in Q4:2016. Expectations
cent during January and February 2017. Furthermore,
of an increase in fiscal spending in the US buoyed risk-
1-year USD inflation swap rate, which is an indicator
on sentiment, leading to a fall in safe haven demand in
of inflation expectations, has been stable since March
November. The increase in long-term yields following
2017.
the rate hike by the Federal Reserve in December led
In the Euro area, inflation accelerated sequentially
to a further fall in demand for gold. In 2017 so far,
during December 2016 to February 2017 to 2.0 per
gold prices have recovered somewhat on political
cent, the highest since February 2013. However, core
uncertainties in the US and Europe (Chart V.4b).
inflation remained steady and below 1.0 per cent.
With commodity and oil prices rebounding, spare Similarly, in the UK, inflation rose to 2.3 per cent in
capacity getting absorbed and inflation expectations February 2017 from 1.6 per cent in December, the
firming up, there has been some uptick in inflation in highest since June 2014. By contrast, inflation in Japan,
major AEs in the recent period. Given the persisting which turned positive in October after six consecutive
economic slack, however, inflation remained below months of deflation, remained low (Chart V.5a).

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
Inflation in major EMEs behaved divergently, driven has kept its monetary stance unchanged since the last
by exchange rate movements and idiosyncratic factors. easing effected in August in response to Brexit. The
In China, Korea, Thailand and Indonesia, inflation monetary stance was also left unchanged by the Bank
remained low and well within the targets of central of Japan (BoJ) in its meeting in March 2017.
banks, despite some mild uptick in January due
In major EMEs, the monetary policy stance has been
to food prices. In contrast, inflation ebbed in Brazil
driven by both domestic factors and the anticipation
and Russia, helped by currency appreciation on the
of a rate hike by the Federal Reserve. China raised its
backdrop of recovery in commodity prices. In other
short term rates in March for the third time in three
major EMEs, inflation pressures remain a concern.
months. Turkey raised its policy rate in November to
In Turkey, high inflation trended further upward
stem currency depreciation in the midst of domestic
in recent months due to currency depreciation.
political uncertainty. Mexico raised its policy rate
High inflation has persisted in South Africa due to
four times during November 2016 to March 2017 to
agricultural supply bottlenecks (Chart V.5b).
counter currency depreciation and contain additional
V.3 Monetary Policy Stance inflationary pressures arising from increase in
gasoline prices by the government. In contrast, Brazil
Even though the monetary policy stance has generally
cut its policy rate four times between October 2016
remained accommodative globally, the stimulus
and February 2017 to contain economic recession as
provided through asset purchase programmes appears
inflationary pressure eased. Chile also reduced its
to have passed its peak. With incoming data showing
policy rate in March 2017 (Chart V.6). In sum, monetary
strengthening of the US economy, the Federal Reserve
policy stance in EMEs has remained divergent.
raised the target federal funds rate twice in December
2016 and March 2017. The Federal Reserve expects V.4 Global Financial Markets
economic conditions to evolve in a manner that
In a generally improving macroeconomic environment
warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate.
beginning in the second half of 2016, global financial
In contrast, the ECB extended the bond purchase
markets were influenced by three events, viz., the US
programme to end-December 2017. For longer-lasting
election, expectations and materialisation of the policy
and smoother transmission of monetary stimulus,
rate hike by the Federal Reserve, and uncertainty
the extent of monthly purchases was reduced from
surrounding the Brexit roadmap.
80 billion to 60 billion, while reducing the
minimum maturity for bond purchases from two Sovereign bond yields in AEs rose further in Q4:2016.
years to one year. The ECB has kept its policy rate Expectations of fiscal stimulus and a quicker pace of
unchanged since March 2016. The Bank of England normalisation in monetary policy led to a significant

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
increase in US Treasury bond yields. Even as term global equity markets. The MSCI World Index,
premia increased, market-based measures of inflation which measures global equity prices, increased by
compensation also contributed significantly to the 9.7 per cent between November 1, 2016 and April
rise in yields. In the Euro area, rising bond yields 3, 2017. In the US, equity prices of financial sector
in late 2016 were boosted by the ECB’s decision to companies registered the largest gains on prospects
reduce the quantum of monthly purchase of assets of less regulation of the sector and higher interest
and to resort to purchase of shorter-dated and lower- earnings due to rising bond yields. In the Euro area,
yielding securities in December 2016. A rise in yield the improving macroeconomic environment played
a major role in the recovery of equity prices, helped
in the US also played a role in firming up of yields in
by improvement in the financial position of some
the Euro area. Sovereign yields in the UK rose due to
European banks. In the case of Japan, the depreciation
better than expected macroeconomic outcomes that
of the yen, which boosted corporate earnings via better
obviated further monetary policy easing, and the rise
export earnings, played a major role. Equity prices
in inflation following the sharp depreciation in the
in EMEs fell initially due to capital outflows and on
pound. In contrast, bond yields in Japan remained
concerns of increasing trade protectionism and rising
more or less flat at around zero as a result of active
borrowing costs. Subsequently, however, equity prices
control of the yield curve by the Bank of Japan
recovered in most EMEs as capital outflows ceased
(Chart V.7a).
and then reversed, as the initial exuberance about the
In emerging markets, bond yields behaved divergently.
US economy subsided and the stance of the Federal
Yields rose in many EMEs after the US election,
Reserve turned less hawkish. In Brazil and Russia,
especially in countries with greater trade linkages
the recovery in commodity prices also buoyed equity
with the US such as Mexico. In China, better economic
markets (Chart V.7b).
performance and an uptick in inflation also partly
Currency markets have been driven mainly by
fuelled a rise in long-term bond yields. In contrast,
anticipation of policy initiatives by the new US
bond yields declined in Brazil as the central bank cut
administration and monetary policy stances in
the policy rate to counter recession. Similarly, bond
major AEs. The US dollar appreciated against most
yields declined in Russia as recovery in oil prices and
currencies beginning early November. It reached
currency appreciation helped in moderating inflation
a 14-year high in December, before some reversal
expectations.
in Q1:2017 on uncertainty in realisation of Trump
The optimism generated after the US election, administration’s policy initiatives and expectations
alongside the strengthening of the global recovery of a slower pace of rate hikes by the Federal Reserve.
in the later part of 2016, led to a strong rally in The euro depreciated against the US dollar on political

MONETARY POLICY REPORT APRIL 2017
uncertainty. The pound was volatile against the US Risk-on and risk-off behaviour and search for yields
dollar – it gained during late November and early have been important drivers of portfolio flows in the
December on expectations of a favourable deal with the recent period. During 2016, cross border capital flows
EU, but depreciated in January 2017 on resurfacing of were impacted mainly by the heightened uncertainty
uncertainty in the deal. The Japanese yen depreciated and abrupt political and policy changes. However, in
as yield spreads between Japan and the US/Euro area the most recent period, portfolio flows have returned
widened, before narrowing somewhat in Q1 of 2017. to EMEs, shrugging off the rise in interest rates in
the US, as EMEs continue to provide attractive bond
The currencies of EMEs have also depreciated sharply
yields and return on equities.
since November 2016. Central banks in several
EMEs such as Mexico, Malaysia, Indonesia and To sum up, the modest turnaround in global recovery
Turkey intervened in currency markets to stem the since the latter part of the previous year is projected to
depreciation, leading to losses of reserves. Despite strengthen further. While AEs are likely to consolidate
intervention, the Mexican peso depreciated sharply economic recovery, the ongoing slowdown in EMEs
due to its close trade and financial linkages with the could reverse. Despite some firming up, inflation in
US. The Turkish lira depreciated due to its domestic AEs is expected to largely remain stable going by the
political problems. Initial depreciation of currencies 1-year inflation swap rate in the US. Economic activity
in major commodity exporting EMEs such as Brazil, and financial markets will continue to be impacted by
Russia and South Africa reversed, as the rise in political and policy uncertainties as well as monetary
commodity prices provided tailwinds (Chart V.8). policy moves by major AEs.