Monetary Policy Report
OCTOBER 2017
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai
MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Contents
Chapter I: Macroeconomic Outlook 1
I.1 : The Outlook for Infl ation 3
I.2 : The Outlook for Growth 6
I.3 : Balance of Risks 7
Box I.1: Farm Loan Waivers, Fiscal Stimulus and Infl ation 5
Box I.2 : Towards a Prototype Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE)
Model for India 8
Chapter II: Prices and Costs 12
II.1 : Consumer Prices 12
II.2 : Drivers of Infl ation 14
II.3 : Costs 22
Box II.1: Impact of GST on CPI Infl ation 20
Chapter III: Demand and Output 25
III.1 : Aggregate Demand 25
III.2 : Aggregate Supply 31
III.3 : Output Gap 37
Box III.1: Finance Neutral Output Gap 38
Chapter IV: Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions 41
IV.1 : Financial Markets 41
IV.2 : Monetary Policy Transmission 52
IV.3 : Liquidity Conditions and the Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy 54
Box IV.1: Operating Target Volatility and Monetary Policy Transmission 43
Box IV.2: Managing the Post-Demonetisation Liquidity Glut: Minimising
Risks to Infl ation 55
Chapter V: External Environment 58
V.1 : Global Economic Conditions 58
V.2 : Commodity Prices and Global Infl ation 60
V.3 : Monetary Policy Stance 62
V.4 : Global Financial Markets 62
Box V.1: Implications of Unwinding of US Fed Balance Sheet 63
iii
MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
ABBREVIATIONS
AEs - Advanced Economies CPI-RL - Consumer Price Index for Rural
Labourers
ARCH - Autoregressive Conditional
Heteroscedasticity CRAR - Capital to Risk Weighted Assets
Ratio
ARDL - Autoregressive Distributed Lag
CRR - Cash Reserve Ratio
ARIMA - Autoregressive Integrated Moving
Average CSO - Central Statistics Offi ce
AUM - Assets Under Management CU - Capacity Utilisation
CV - Coeffi cient of Variation
BE - Budget Estimates
DEA - Digestive Enzymes and Antacids
BK - Baxter-King
DGCI&S - Directorate General of Commercial
bps - Basis Point
Intelligence and Statistics
BSE - Bombay Stock Exchange
DISCOMs - Distribution Companies
BVAR - Bayesian VAR
DSGE - Dynamic Stochastic General
CAD - Current Account Defi cit Equilibrium
CASA - Current Account and Saving Account ECB - European Central Bank
CBLO - Collateralised Borrowing and ECBs - External Commercial Borrowings
Lending Obligation
ECM - Error Correction Model
CCIL - Clearing Corporation of India Ltd.
EMDEs - Emerging Market and Developing
CD - Certifi cate of Deposit Economies
CF - Christiano-Fitzqeraled EMEs - Emerging Market Economies
CGA - Controller General of Accounts EU - European Union
CII - Confederation of Indian Industry FAO - Food and Agriculture Organisation
CLI - Composite Leading Indicator FC - Finance Commission
CMBs - Cash Management Bills FCCB - Foreign Currency Convertible Bond
CMIE - Centre for Monitoring Indian FCNR - Foreign Currency Non-Resident
Economy
FDI - Foreign Direct Investment
CP - Commercial Paper
FI - Financial Institution
CPB - Central Planning Bureau FICCI - Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry
CPC - Central Pay Commission
FIMMDA - Fixed Income Money Markets and
CPI - Consumer Price Index
Derivatives Association
CPI-AL - Consumer Price Index for
FMCG - Fast-moving Consumer Goods
Agricultural Labourers
FOMC - Federal Open Market Committee
CPI-IW - Consumer Price Index for Industrial
Workers FPI - Foreign Portfolio Investment
v
MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
FRBM - Fiscal Responsibility and Budget IOCL - Indian Oil Corporation Limited
Management
IOS - Industrial Outlook Survey
FY - Financial Year
IPO - Initial Public Offering
GARCH - Generalised Autoregressive
IRFs - Impulse Response Functions
Conditional Heteroscedasticity
ISM - Institute for Supply Management
GDP - Gross Domestic Product
LAF - Liquidity Adjustment Facility
GFC - Global Financial Crisis
GFCE - Government Final Consumption LCR - Liquidity Coverage Ratio
Expenditure
LIC - Life Insurance Corporation of India
GFCF - Gross Fixed Capital Formation
LPA - Long Period Avarage
GFD - Gross Fiscal Defi cit
LPG - Liquefi ed Petroleum Gas
GIC - General Insurance Corporation of
M3 - Broad Money
India
mb/d - Million Barrels Per Day
GNDI - Gross National Disposable Income
MBS - Mortgage Backed Securities
GNPA - Gross Non-Performing Assets
GoI - Government of India MCA - Ministry of Corporate Affairs
G-Secs - Government Securities MCLR - Marginal Cost of Funds Based
Lending Rate
GST - Goods and Services Tax
MIBOR - Mumbai Inter-bank Outright Rate
GSTN - Goods and Services Tax Network
MIFOR - Mumbai Inter-bank Forward Offer
GSTR - Goods and Services Tax Return
Rate
GVA - Gross Value Added
MNREGA - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
H1 - First Half of the Year
Employment Guarantee Act
H2 - Second Half of the Year
m-o-m - Month-on-Month
HDFC - Housing Development Finance
MoF - Ministry of Finance
Corporation
MoU - Memorandum of Understanding
HP - Hodrick-Prescott
MPC - Monetary Policy Committee
HRA - House Rent Allowance
IBC - Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code MPR - Monetary Policy Report
ICRR - Incremental Cash Reserve Ratio MSCI - Morgan Stanley Capital International
IGST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax MSMEs - Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises
IIP - Index of Industrial Production
MSP - Minimum Support Price
IMD - India Meteorological Department
IMF - International Monetary Fund MSS - Market Stabilisation Scheme
IND-AS - Indian Accounting Standard MVKF - Multivariate Kalman Filter
INR - Indian Rupee NBFCs - Non-Banking Financial Companies
vi
MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
NBFCs-D - Deposit-taking NBFCs q-o-q - Quarter-on-Quarter
NBFCs-ND-SI - Systemically Important Non-deposit RBI - Reserve Bank of India
Taking NBFCs
REER - Real Effective Exchange Rate
NCAER - National Council of Applied
RHS - Right Hand Side
Economic Research
RRBs - Regional Rural Banks
NDS-CALL - Negotiated Dealing System-Call
NDTL - Net Demand and Time Liabilities SAAR - Seasonally Adjusted Annualised Rate
NEER - Nominal Effective Exchange Rate SBNs - Specifi ed Bank Notes
NFC - Non-Food Credit SCBs - Scheduled Commercial Banks
NHB - National Housing Bank
SDLs - State Development Loans
NIM - Net Interest Margin
SEBI - Securities and Exchange Board of
NPA - Non-performing Asset India
NRE - Non Resident Rupee SIAM - Society of Indian Automobile
NSDL - National Securities Depository Manufactures
Limited
SLR - Statutory Liquidity Ratio
NSE - National Stock Exchange
SME - Small and Medium Enterprise
NSSF - National Small Savings Fund
T-Bill - Treasury Bill
ODs - Overdrafts
UDAY - Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana
OECD - Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development UK - United Kingdom
OIS - Overnight Index Swap US - United States
OMOs - Open Market Operations USD - US Dollar
OPEC - Organisation of the Petroleum
VAR - Vector Autoregression
Exporting Countries
VAT - Value Added Tax
PADO - Public Administration, Defence and
Other services VR - Variable Rate
PCE - Personal Consumption Expenditure WACR - Weighted Average Call Money Rate
PFCE - Private Final Consumption WADTDR - Weighted Average Domestic Term
Expenditure
Deposit Rate
PMI - Purchasing Managers’ Index
WALR - Weighted Average Lending Rate
PPAC - Petroleum Planning and Analysis
WMA - Ways and Means Advances
Cell
WPI - Wholesale Price Index
PRN - Production Weighted Rainfall Index
WTI - West Texas Intermediate
PSBs - Public Sector Banks
PVBs - Private Sector Banks WTO - World Trade Organisation
QE - Quantitative Easing y-o-y - Year-on-Year
vii
MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
I. Macroeconomic Outlook
Inflation is expected to pick up from its recent lows as favourable base effects reverse and enhanced house rent
allowances are disbursed to central government employees. Economic activity is expected to recover, with an
improvement in the services sector, even as investment activity remains anaemic.
Since the Monetary Policy Report (MPR) of April loss of credibility. In its August 2017 meeting, the
2017, the macroeconomic setting for the conduct of MPC decided to reduce the policy repo rate by 25
monetary policy has undergone signifi cant shifts. basis points (bps), noting that (i) the baseline path of
The gradual fi rming up of global growth, especially headline infl ation excluding the impact of house rent
in advanced economies (AEs), has whetted a renewed allowances (HRA) awarded under the recommendation
search for returns that has buoyed global fi nancial of the seventh central pay commission (CPC) was
markets. Capital fl ows to emerging market economies likely to fall below the projection made in June to a
(EMEs) have resumed strongly, albeit with some little above 4 per cent by Q4; (ii) infl ation excluding
differentiation in favour of jurisdictions that have food and fuel had fallen signifi cantly since May after
relatively resilient fundamentals. These fl ows are remaining sticky through 2016-17; (iii) the roll-out of
likely to abate to an extent due to the upcoming the GST during July 2017 had been relatively smooth;
unwinding of quantitative easing (QE) by the US and (iv) the monsoon was expected to be normal.
Federal Reserve. It judged, therefore, that several upside risks to the
baseline infl ation path had either reduced or not
In India, the slowdown of economic activity that set
materialised. These factors opened up some space for
in from Q1 of 2016-17 and became pronounced in
monetary accommodation, especially after accounting
the second half of the year appears to have extended
for risks to the growth outlook.
into the fi rst half of 2017-18. Looking ahead, some
improvement in services may counterbalance the An interesting development has been the changing
persisting weakness in industrial production. Infl ation profi le of voting in the MPC. After a unanimous vote
underwent a dramatic decline, reaching a historic low in its April meeting, the MPC’s decision in June was
in June, but as the prints for July and August portend, by a majority. While fi ve members voted for keeping
a gradually rising trajectory may take hold over the the policy repo rate unchanged, one member voted in
rest of 2017-18. Alongside these developments, there favour of a 50 bps cut in the policy repo rate. In the
has been an improvement in external viability; the August meeting of the MPC, four members voted for a
foreign exchange reserves were around 11.5 months policy repo rate cut of 25 bps, one member voted for a
of imports in September 2017 and over 4 times short- cut in the policy repo rate by 50 bps and one member
term external debt. voted for status quo. These patterns refl ect diversity,
individual experiences and intellectual independence.
Monetary Policy Committee: April-August 2017
This development is in consonance with the cross-
Against this backdrop, the monetary policy committee
country evidence on MPCs with external membership
(MPC) met in June and August under its pre-announced
(Table I.1).
bi-monthly schedule. Following up on its decision to
Macroeconomic Outlook
keep the policy rate unchanged in April 2017, the MPC
maintained status quo in its June 2017 meeting. While Chapters II and III present analyses of macroeconomic
taking note of the signifi cant easing of infl ation, the developments during 2017-18 so far that explain
MPC observed that there is considerable uncertainty why infl ation and growth of gross value added
around the evolving infl ation trajectory. Accordingly, (GVA) undershot staff’s projections set out in the
it persevered with a neutral stance, while remaining April 2017 MPR. Moving on to the outlook, staff’s
watchful of incoming data, and noted that premature assessment of the likely evolution of domestic and
action risked disruptive policy reversals later and global macroeconomic and fi nancial conditions over

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Table I.1: Monetary Policy Committees and Table I.2: Baseline Assumptions for
Voting Patterns Near-Term Projections
Country Number of policy meetings during Variable April 2017 MPR Current
April-September 2017 (October 2017) MPR
Total meetings Meetings with Meetings with
full consensus dissent Crude oil (Indian Basket) US$ 50 per barrel US$ 55 per barrel
during FY 2017-18 during 2017-18: H2
Brazil 4 4 0 Exchange rate `65/US$ Current level
Chile 6 3 3 Monsoon Normal for 2017 5 per cent below LPA
Colombia 6 0 6 Global growth 3.4 per cent in 2017 3.5 per cent in 2017
Czech Republic 4 3 1 3.6 per cent in 2018 3.6 per cent in 2018
Hungary 6 6 0 Fiscal deficit To remain within To remain within
Japan 4 0 4 BE 2017- 18 (3.2 per BE 2017- 18 (3.2 per
cent of GDP) cent of GDP)
Thailand 4 4 0
Domestic macroeconomic/ No major change No major change
Sweden 3 3 0
structural policies during
UK 4 0 4
the forecast period
US 4 3 1
Notes:
Source: Central bank websites.
1. The Indian basket of crude oil represents a derived numeraire
comprising sour grade (Oman and Dubai average) and sweet grade
the forecast horizon remains broadly consistent with
(Brent) crude oil processed in Indian refineries in the ratio of 72:28.
the baseline assumptions made in the April 2017 MPR 2. The exchange rate path assumed here is for the purpose of generating
staff’s baseline growth and inflation projections and does not indicate
(Table I.2).
any ‘view’ on the level of the exchange rate. The Reserve Bank is guided
by the need to contain volatility in the foreign exchange market and not
First, the spatial and temporal distribution of the by any specific level of/band around the exchange rate.
south-west monsoon has been uneven and defi cient 3. Global growth projections are from the World Economic Outlook (January
2017 and July 2017 updates), International Monetary Fund (IMF).
in some parts of the country, which is expected to lead
4. BE: Budget estimates.
to a decline in kharif output. Second, global crude oil 5. LPA: Long period average (average rainfall during 1951-2000).
prices have moved in a relatively wide range of US$ 44-
vis-à-vis other major currencies. The rupee has,
57 per barrel over the past six months. Futures prices
however, reversed some recent gains with the
juxtaposed with the outlook for global production,
announcement of the unwinding of QE by the Fed.
demand and inventories suggest that crude prices
could be around US$ 55 per barrel during the second Fourth, the outlook for global growth and trade remains
half of 2017-18 (Chart I.1). Third, the exchange rate broadly unchanged from the April 2017 assessment,
of the rupee has exhibited two-way movements with some acceleration relative to 2016 for both AEs
vis-à-vis the US dollar since March 2017 with an and emerging market and developing economies
appreciating bias until July 2017, given the strength (EMDEs) (Chart I.2). During 2018, AEs are expected
of capital infl ows and the weakening of the US dollar to lose some momentum, with fi scal policy in the US

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
projected to be less expansionary than expected in survey from the June 2017 round.2 Respondent
April. In contrast, EMDEs are expected to sustain the households expected infl ation to be 7.2 per cent three
recent pick-up in growth. Increases in international months ahead and 8.0 per cent a year ahead. In terms
air freight and container port throughput along with of qualitative responses, however, the proportion
of respondents expecting the general price level to
the plateauing of export orders suggest that the world
increase by more than the current rate rose over both
trade volume growth, after some strengthening in the
the three-month and the one year horizons (Chart I.3).
third quarter of 2017, could moderate towards the end
of the year.1 This could have implications for staff’s Manufacturing fi rms polled in the September 2017
baseline outlook for external demand. round of the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook survey
expected some softening in inputs costs a quarter
I.1 The Outlook for Infl ation
ahead, both for raw materials and staff costs.3 The
The softness in headline infl ation observed during respondents also expected some moderation in
April-June 2017 is projected to reverse in the coming selling prices, indicating weak pricing power (Chart
months. First, the prices of food items, especially of I.4). In the Nikkei’s purchasing managers’ survey for
vegetables – which declined sharply in Q1 (April-June) September 2017, fi rms in the manufacturing sector
faced input and output price pressures from higher
as against the typical seasonal fi rming up in these
tax rates and prices of steel and petroleum products;
months – have started edging higher. Second, the
fi rms in the services sector in August 2017 faced price
Central Government has implemented the increase in
pressures from higher tax rates.
HRA for its employees effective July 2017. Third, there
was a broad-based rebound in the various underlying Professional forecasters surveyed by the Reserve Bank
measures of infl ation in July-August 2017, reversing in in September 2017 expected CPI infl ation to pick up
to 4.5 per cent by Q4:2017-18, with the ebbing away
large part the softness seen during April-June.
of favourable base effects (Chart I.5)4. Their medium-
Infl ation expectations of economic agents play a key
term infl ation expectations (5 years ahead) remained
role in shaping the actual outcome through wages
and price-setting behaviour. Quantitative infl ation 2 The Reserve Bank’s inflation expectations survey of households is
conducted in 18 cities and the results of the September 2017 survey are
expectations of urban households eased by 30-60 bps
based on responses from 4,996 households.
in the September 2017 round of the Reserve Bank’s 3 The September round results are based on responses from 1,141
companies.
1 World Trade Outlook Indicator, August 7, 2017, World Trade Organisation 4 30 forecasters participated in the September round of the Reserve Bank’s
(WTO). survey of professional forecasters.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
unchanged at 4.3 per cent, while the longer-term major exogenous shocks, structural model estimates
infl ation expectations (10 years ahead) rose by 10 bps indicate that infl ation is expected to increase from 4.6
to 4.1 per cent. per cent in Q1 to 4.9 per cent in Q3 and then soften
to 4.5 per cent by Q4:2018-19 as the statistical impact
Taking into account the revised assumptions on initial
of the Central Government’s HRA enhancement
conditions, signals from forward looking surveys
fades. The 50 per cent and the 70 per cent confi dence
and estimates from structural and other models, CPI
intervals for Q4:2018-19 are 2.7-6.5 per cent and 1.7-
infl ation is projected to pick up from 3.4 per cent
7.5 per cent, respectively.
during August 2017 to 4.2 per cent in Q3:2017-18 and
4.6 per cent in Q4, refl ecting the combined effects of There are upside as well as downside risks to these
unfavourable base effects, the upturn in food prices baseline forecasts. The major upside risks emanate
and the impact of the increase in the HRA (a statistical from the expected increases in salaries and allowances
effect on the CPI index) announced by the Central by State Governments; the possible fi scal slippages
Government (Chart I.6). The 50 per cent and the 70 per due to farm loan waivers by some States and potential
cent confi dence intervals for infl ation in Q4:2017-18 stimulus measures by the Central Government
are 3.3-6.0 per cent and 2.6-6.8 per cent, respectively. (Box I.1); short-term uncertainty around the GST
For 2018-19, assuming a normal monsoon and no impact; and the expected decline in the production

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Box I.1: Farm Loan Waivers, Fiscal Stimulus and Infl ation
Five States – Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab,
Karnataka and Rajasthan – have announced farm loan
waivers in 2017-18 so far. Two of these states – Uttar
Pradesh and Punjab – have made provisions for the
likely increase in expenditure in their budgets for 2017-
18. During 2014-2016, three States – Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana, and Tamil Nadu – had announced farm
loan waivers aggregating `470 billion, but staggered
over fi ve years. There are reports of a few more States
considering farm loan waivers.
Furthermore, against the backdrop of the growth
slowdown, there are reports that the Central
Government might undertake policy actions to provide
a boost to growth. Slowing growth could also have
some adverse impact on tax revenues. The Central
Government’s fi scal defi cit could potentially widen on
account of these factors. Taking these developments
into considerations, the combined (Centre plus States)
fi scal defi cit to GDP ratio may increase by around 100
the fi scal defi cit and infl ation, higher is the impact of
bps in 2017-18.
an increase in the fi scal defi cit on infl ation (Mitra et
Higher fi scal defi cits per se can lead to an increase
al., 2017) (Chart A).5 With the combined fi scal defi cit
in infl ation expectations and actual infl ation (Catao
budgeted at 5.9 per cent for 2017-18, empirical estimates
and Terrones, 2005). Moreover, budget constraints
suggest that an increase in the fi scal defi cit to GDP ratio
might force some of the States to reduce their capital
by 100 bps could lead to a permanent increase of about
expenditure. If capital/infrastructural constraints are
50 bps in infl ation.
binding, a reduction in capital expenditure may turn
out to be infl ationary as costs – including time value/ References:
opportunity cost of delays and material damages – go
Catao, L.A. and M.E. Terrones (2005), “Fiscal Defi cits
up as a result of capacity restraints becoming even
and Infl ation”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(3),
more acute and due to attendant “congestion charges”.
529-554.
Higher market borrowings on the back of higher defi cits
can also put upward pressure on borrowing costs for Mitra, P., I. Bhattacharyya, J. John, I. Manna and A.T.
the Centre and the States, which could spill over to the George (2017), “Farm Loan Waivers, Fiscal Defi cit and
broader economy. Infl ation”, Mint Street Memo No.5, Reserve Bank of
India.
Empirical assessment suggests that: (a) there exists
a long-run relationship between fi scal defi cits and Pesaran, M.H., Y. Shin and R.J. Smith (2001),
infl ation in India; (b) causality runs from fi scal defi cits “Bounds Testing Approaches to the Analysis of Level
to infl ation; and (c) the impact of fi scal defi cits on Relationships”, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 16(3),
infl ation is non-linear, i.e., higher the initial levels of 289-326.
5 The empirical relationship between infl ation and fi scal defi cit – the long-run as well as the short-run dynamics – is examined using the Autoregressive
Distributed Lag (ARDL) Cointegration approach proposed by Pesaran et al. (2001) as follows:
 = a+b*X (1)
t t
= C + C *  + C *X + C * + C *X + C *OG + C *OG + C *LC + C *LE +  (2a)
t 01 11 t-1 21 t-1 31 t-1 41 t 51 t-2 61 t-3 71 t 81 t 1t
X= C + C *  + C *X + C *X + C * + C *OG + C *OG + C *LC + C *LE +  (2b)
t 02 12 t-1 22 t-1 32 t-1 42 t 52 t-2 62 t-3 72 t 82 t 2t
Equation 1 captures the long-run relationship and equations 2a-2b capture the error correction (short-run) dynamics. The variables are defi ned as follows:
 = log(1+CPI Infl ation); X = (GFD/GDP)2; OG = Output gap; LC = log of crude oil prices; LE = log of exchange rate (Rupees per US dollar). The non-linear
relationship between infl ation and fi scal defi cit is captured by using log of infl ation as the dependent variable and including the square of the fi scal defi cit/
GDP ratio as an explanatory variable. These data transformations allow for the infl ation-fi scal defi cit elasticity to change across infl ation rates and fi scal
defi cit ratios. The empirical analysis uses quarterly data for 2006-17.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
of kharif foodgrains. In terms of downside risks,
adequate food stocks and effective supply management
measures by the government could keep food infl ation
lower than expected and pull down headline infl ation
below the baseline.
I.2 The Outlook for Growth
The April 2017 MPR had projected an acceleration
in real GVA for 2017-18 on the back of (a) a recovery
in discretionary spending spurred by the pace of
remonetisation; (b) the reduction in banks’ lending
rates on fresh loans brought about by demonetisation-
induced liquidity; (c) the growth stimulating proposals
in the Union Budget 2017-18; (d) a normal south-
west monsoon; and (e) an improvement in external
demand. Stressed balance sheets of banks and the
possibility of higher global commodity prices were
seen as downside risks to growth prospects.
about prospects of income and employment a year
Some of these expectations have materialised, whereas
ahead (Chart I.7).6
the recovery in discretionary and investment spending
has been weaker than expected and kharif foodgrains Overall optimism in the manufacturing sector for
production is expected to be lower than last year in the quarter ahead improved in the September round
view of the shortfall and irregular rainfall during of the RBI’s industrial outlook survey on account of
the south-west monsoon this year. The uncertainty better prospects for production, order books, capacity
about the implementation of GST also appears to utilisation, exports and profi t margins, even as the
have had some impact on economic activity, although current assessment dropped further (Chart I.8).
it is expected to be offset by productivity-enhancing
Surveys conducted by other agencies indicate
effects in the medium- and long-run.
a dip in business confi dence over the previous
Consumer confi dence dipped in the September 2017
round (Table I.3). In the Nikkei’s purchasing
round of the RBI’s survey on declining optimism
Table I.3: Business Expectations Surveys
Item NCAER FICCI Dun and CII
Business Overall Bradstreet Business
Confidence Business Composite Confidence
Index Confidence Business Index
(July 2017) Index Optimism (September
(August Index 2017)
2017) (June 2017)
Current level of 136.0 66.1 72.1 58.3
the index
Index as per 139.5 68.3 78.9 64.4
previous Survey
% change (q-o-q) -2.5 -3.2 -8.6 -9.5
sequential
% change (y-o-y) 9.4 -1.8@ -13.3 0.5
Notes:
1. NCAER: National Council of Applied Economic Research.
2. FICCI: Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry.
3. CII: Confederation of Indian Industry.
@: Change over the October 2016 round.
6 The survey is conducted by the Reserve Bank in six metropolitan cities
and the September round elicited responses from 5,100 respondents.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
managers’ survey, fi rms in the manufacturing In the September round of the RBI’s survey,
sector (September 2017) and the services sector professional forecasters expected real GVA growth
(August 2017) were optimistic about future output to pick up from 5.6 per cent in Q1:2017-18 to 7.2 per
prospects. cent in Q4:2017-18 and to 7.5 per cent in Q2:2018-19,
led by improvement in industry and services sector
Table I.4: Reserve Bank’s Baseline and Professional
activity (Chart I.9 and Table I.4).
Forecasters’ Median Projections
(Per cent) Taking into account the outturn in the fi rst half, the
2017-18 2018-19 baseline assumptions, survey indicators and model
forecasts, real GVA growth is projected at 6.7 per cent
Reserve Bank’s Baseline Projections
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 4.6 4.5 for 2017-18 – 6.4 per cent in Q2, 7.1 per cent in Q3
Real Gross Value Added (GVA) Growth 6.7 7.4 and 7.7 per cent in Q4 – with risks evenly balanced
Assessment of Professional Forecasters@
around this baseline path. For 2018-19, structural
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 4.5 4.5#
model estimates indicate that real GVA may grow
GVA Growth 6.6 7.4
Agriculture and Allied Activities 3.2 3.0 by 7.4 per cent, assuming a normal monsoon, fi scal
Industry 4.8 7.0 consolidation in line with the announced trajectory,
Services 8.1 8.7
and no major exogenous/policy shocks (Chart I.10).
Gross Domestic Saving (per cent of GNDI) 31.2 32.3
Gross Fixed Capital Formation (per cent of GDP) 26.5 27.6 Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE)
Credit Growth of Scheduled Commercial Banks 8.0 10.0
models are workhorse tools for policy analysis by
Combined Gross Fiscal Deficit (per cent of GDP) 6.5 6.0
Central Government Gross Fiscal Deficit 3.2 3.0 a number of central banks. In the RBI, efforts are
(per cent of GDP)
underway to develop such a model to enrich analytical
Repo Rate (end period) 6.00 6.00#
inputs for the conduct of future monetary policy
Yield on 91-days Treasury Bills (end period) 6.0 6.1
Yield on 10-years Central Government Securities 6.7 6.9 (Box I.2).
(end period)
I.3 Balance of Risks
Overall Balance of Payments (US $ billion.) 30.0 25.0
Merchandise Export Growth 6.5 7.9
The baseline projections of growth and infl ation are
Merchandise Import Growth 11.5 9.5
Current Account Balance (per cent of GDP) -1.5 -1.8 inter alia conditional on the assumptions set out in
Table I.1. A caveat is that the baseline growth and
@: Median forecasts; GNDI: Gross National Disposable Income.
#: Forecast for Q2:2018-19. infl ation trajectories do not incorporate the impact
Source: RBI staff estimates; and Survey of Professional Forecasters
(September 2017). of the likely increases in pay and allowances by State

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Box I.2: Towards a Prototype Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) Model for India
Built on microeconomic foundations, DSGE models rE[C/( C )] = 1 (1)
t t t t+1 t+1
emphasise agents’ inter-temporal choice and assign
lµ-1 = W/C (2)
a central role to agents’ expectations around the t t t
where  is the subjective discount factor, µ is the
determination of macroeconomic outcomes. These
inverse of the Frisch inter-temporal elasticity, W stands
models are able to generate outcomes from policy
for real wages, is the rate of infl ation and r is the
simulations (or counterfactuals) that are not explicitly
t t
gross nominal interest rate.
susceptible to the Lucas (1976) critique of traditional
macro-econometric models using reduced-form There is a continuum of intermediate goods producing
representations that may not be robust to shifts in the fi rms that manufacture Y(i) units of differentiated
t
underlying economic structure induced by changes intermediate good i using the following technology:
in policy. Given the general equilibrium nature, the
Y(i) = zl(i) (3)
DSGE models can capture the interplay between policy t t t
actions and agents’ behaviour (Sbordone et al, 2010). where z is an exogenous productivity shock which
t
The earliest DSGE model, representing an economy follows a random walk with drift. The representative
without distortions, was the real business cycle model intermediate goods producing fi rm chooses the price
that focused on the effects of productivity shocks P(i) to maximise the total market value, subject to
t
(Kydland and Prescott, 1982). Since then, there has the demand schedule of the fi nal goods producer,
been considerable improvement in specifi cation and technology constraint and quadratic price adjustment
estimation techniques. Current DSGE models embody cost given by , where  is the degree of
a wider set of distortions and shocks than earlier price adjustment cost. Solving the fi rst order condition
generation efforts (Christiano et al., 2005; Smets and of this optimisation exercise produces the non-linear
Wouters, 2007). new Keynesian Phillips curve given by
Several central banks, both in AEs and EMEs – Bank
of Canada; Bank of England; European Central Bank;  (4)
Central Bank of Chile to name a few – have developed where  is the price elasticity of output8. The equation
such models for policy analysis and employ them
states that the fi rm sets prices as a mark-up over
extensively to evaluate alternative policy scenarios and marginal costs, taking into consideration quadratic
instrument choices. price adjustment costs (Mumtaz and Zanetti, 2013). As
A prototype New Keynesian DSGE model for India would Ireland (2004) explains, the intermediate fi rm fi xes its
mark-up of price P(i) over marginal cost in proportion to
need to be calibrated to country specifi c conditions.
t
/(–1) in the absence of costly price adjustment. With
Drawing on Ireland (2004), the economy is hypothesised
price adjustment cost, a fi rm’s actual mark-up would
to be inhabited by a representative household which
deviate from the desired mark-up and gravitate towards
maximises a lifetime expected utility function, subject
the latter over time.
to an inter-temporal budget constraint. The felicity
function7 depends on consumption (C) and labour (l) The central bank sets the nominal interest rate
supplied to the intermediate goods producing sector. according to the Taylor rule:
The fi rst-order condition of household optimisation
consists of (i) the Euler equation which relates the
(5)
real interest rate to the inter-temporal marginal rate
of substitution; and (ii) an inter-temporal optimality where r and y are the steady-state interest rate and
ss ss
condition linking the real wage to the marginal rate of steady-state output, respectively, and  is an exogenous
t
substitution between leisure and consumption. (Contd...)
7 The household maximises subject to . The household enters period t with bonds which
provides units of currency upon maturity. The household uses this money to purchase new bonds of value , where is the gross nominal interest
rate between t and t+1. T is the nominal profi ts from intermediate goods producing fi rms.
t
8 is the steady state infl ation, W are the real wages, Y is output and Pis the price level.
t t t

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
policy shock. Equations (1)-(5), along with the market- output, consumption and infl ation, as illustrated in
clearing condition, constitute the system of equations Chart B.
which can be solved using standard DSGE methods. 9 References:
The model parameters can be calibrated to various Christiano, L.J., L. Eichenbaum, and C.L. Evans (2005),
Indian studies (Patra and Kapur, 2012). In this prototype “Nominal Rigidities and Dynamic Effects of a Shock to
model, it is possible then to run counter-factual Monetary Policy”, Journal of Political Economy, 113 (1),
exercises, e.g., simulate the economy wide effect of an 1-45.
expansionary monetary policy a la the reduction in the Ireland, P. (2004), “Technology Shocks in the New
policy repo rate as in the third bi-monthly monetary Keynesian Model”, NBER Working Paper, No.10309,
policy statement of August 2, 2017. An expansionary February.
monetary policy shock reduces interest rate and raises Kydland, F.E. and E.C. Prescott (1982), “Time to Build
and Aggregate Fluctuations”, Econometrica: Journal of
Econometric Society, 50, 1345-1370.
Lucas, R. (1976), “Econometric Policy Valuation: A
Critique”, In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, Vol.1, 19-46, North Holland.
Mumtaz, H. and F. Zanetti (2013), “The Impact of
the Volatility of Monetary Policy Shocks”, Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 45(4), 535-558.
Patra, M.D. and M. Kapur (2012), “Alternative Monetary
Policy Rules for India”, IMF Working Paper, WP/12/118.
Sbordone, A.M., A. Tambalotti, K. Rao and K. Walsh
(2010), “Policy Analysis using DSGE Models – An
Introduction”, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, October,
23-43.
Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007), “Shocks and Frictions
in US Business Cycles”, ECB Working Paper Series,
No.722, February.
Governments for their employees. This section makes disruptions due to geo-political developments with oil
an assessment of the balance of risks around the demand remaining robust could push crude oil prices
baseline projections from a set of plausible alternative higher. The upward pressures on oil prices could,
scenarios. however, get mitigated by the increased production
(i) International Crude Oil Prices of shale gas in response to higher prices. Assuming
that crude oil prices reach US$ 65 in the second half
In the baseline forecasts, the crude oil (Indian basket)
of 2017-18 in this scenario, infl ation could be higher
price is assumed to average around US$ 55 per barrel
by about 30 bps in 2017-18. Real GVA growth could
in the second half of 2017-18 on the expectation
weaken by around 15 bps in 2017-18 due to the direct
that the global oil supply would be suffi cient to
impact of higher input costs as well as spillovers from
meet increasing global demand. However, supply
lower world demand. If, in contrast, crude oil prices
soften below the baseline due to oversupply by the
9 A multi-sectoral model can enrich the dynamics by accommodating
fi nancial frictions refl ecting the role of credit from banks as well as non-bank Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
fi nancial institutions, the external sector, the agriculture sector and the
(OPEC) and/or weaker than anticipated global demand
Government sector. Illustratively, such models can replicate the economic
implications of fi scal stimulus or pass-through of international shocks. and in particular, fall to around US$ 50, infl ation

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
may moderate by about 15 bps, with a boost to real over the pace of US monetary policy normalisation
GVA growth of around 5-10 bps above the baseline in could trigger volatility in fi nancial markets, especially
2017-18 (Charts I.11 and I.12). in view of stretched market valuations. The ensuing
tightening of global fi nancial conditions in a milieu of
(ii) Global Demand
inward-looking protectionist tendencies could amplify
Global demand is expected to be higher in 2017 and downside risks, especially for EMEs. Assuming global
2018 in the baseline scenario with both upside and growth turns out to be 50 bps below the baseline,
downside risks to the outlook. On the downside, the domestic growth and infl ation could fall below the
expected demand boost from expansionary US fi scal baseline forecasts by around 20 bps and 10 bps,
policy may not materialise, given recent developments respectively. However, reduced political risks in the
in the US. In China, growth has remained resilient, euro area could lead to a more sustained and stronger
but concerns over its sustainability remain in view cyclical rebound, providing a boost to global growth.
of the large overhang of debt. Persisting disconnect Assuming that global growth is higher by 25 bps, real
between market participants’ assessment and that GVA growth and infl ation could turn out to be around
of the US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) 10 bps and 5 bps, respectively, above the baseline.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
(iii) Exchange Rate food prices in the coming months is in line with the
average of the past fi ve years, headline infl ation may
The exchange rate of the Indian rupee has exhibited
turn out to be 100 bps above the baseline.
two-way movements vis-à-vis the US dollar during the
fi rst half of 2017-18. Going forward, the normalisation (v) Pay and Allowances – Implementation by States
of monetary policy in the US (and possibly other
The impact of increased salaries and pensions of
central banks in AEs) and protectionist policies of
Central Government employees in 2016 and the
major AEs and EMEs could lead to some volatility in
implementation of HRA effective July 2017 has been
the foreign exchange market and downward pressures
embedded in the baseline forecasts. Assuming that
on the exchange rate. A depreciation of the Indian
State Governments implement a similar order of
rupee by around 5 per cent relative to the baseline
increase in their pay and allowances, CPI infl ation
could raise infl ation by around 20 bps in 2017-18,
could go up to 100 bps above the baseline on account
while producing some positive impact on net exports
of the direct statistical effect of higher house rents
and growth. On the other hand, in view of the robust
with possible indirect effects emanating from higher
growth prospects of the Indian economy in a cross-
demand and increase in infl ation expectations.
country perspective and the various initiatives to
(vi) Fiscal Slippage
attract foreign direct investment, India is likely to
remain an attractive destination for foreign investors
As noted earlier, there are upside risks to the Central
and this could lead to an appreciation of the domestic
Government’s fi scal defi cit from possible measures to
currency. An appreciation of the Indian rupee by 5 per
provide a boost to domestic demand and from lower
cent could soften infl ation by around 20 bps but also
tax revenues. Assuming that the Central Government’s
deliver a negative impact of 10-15 bps on real GVA
fi scal defi cit/GDP ratio widens by 50 bps in 2017-18,
growth.
infl ation could be around 25 bps above the baseline.
(iv) Food Infl ation
To conclude, the growth outlook is expected to
The substantial softening of headline infl ation in improve in the second half of 2017-18, although it
the fi rst quarter of 2017-18 refl ected the absence could be weighed down by still sluggish investment
of the usual seasonal pick up in food prices in the and export activity. Higher food prices and the
post-winter period, especially pulses and vegetables. increase in house rent allowances by the Central
These food price dynamics may have both structural Government for its employees are expected to result
and cyclical elements, although it is diffi cult to in an increase in headline infl ation in the second half
disentangle them at this juncture. If the softening in of 2017-18. There are upside risks to the infl ation
food infl ation observed since the second half of 2016 outlook from (i) the lower kharif foodgrains output;
is largely structural, then the momentum in food (ii) farm loan waivers by some State Governments and
prices in the rest of 2017-18 could be negligible and possibility of Central Government stimulus; and (iii)
headline infl ation could be below the baseline by up the implementation of higher pay and allowances by
to 2 percentage points. If however, low food infl ation the State Governments for their employees, which
turns out to be largely cyclical, food prices are likely to will impact the baseline projections of growth and
revert to trend. Assuming that the momentum in the infl ation as they materialise.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
II. Prices and Costs
Consumer price inflation fell sharply in the first quarter of 2017-18, driven down by a collapse in food inflation
and a marked moderation in inflation in other components. The trajectory reversed in July and August as vegetable
prices spiked and prices of other goods and services firmed up. Input costs tracked movements in international
commodity prices, while wage growth in the organised and rural sectors firmed up modestly.
The MPR of April 2017 had projected consumer price The cumulative impact was that headline infl ation
index (CPI) infl ation1 to increase to 4.2 per cent plunged to 2.2 per cent in Q1:2017-18 and 2.9 per cent
in Q1:2017-18 and further to 4.7 per cent in Q2 on in the fi rst two months of Q2 – signifi cantly lower
the expectation that the compression imposed by than the assessment made at the time of the April
demonetisation on perishable food prices would MPR. Although these forces continue to drive a wedge
wane, and the usual seasonal uptick that characterises between actual and projected infl ation in terms of
pre-monsoon months would take over. In the event, levels, a directional alignment is gradually occurring
infl ation developments in the fi rst half of 2017- since July (Chart II.1a).
18 were foreshadowed by the prolonged impact of
Large and unanticipated supply shocks have produced
food supply shocks. Consequently, actual infl ation
at least two systematic deviations of actual and
outcomes were pushed much below their projected
projected infl ation in terms of the new index (Chart
path. First, food prices sank into defl ation in May
II.1b). Both capture signifi cant underlying shifts in
and June 2017. Second, crude prices fell in April,
demand-supply balances in key infl ation-sensitive
remaining soft and range-bound in ensuing months;
goods and services, which should have warranted
combined with an appreciating exchange rate, this
policy responses of a scale and range beyond the
resulted in a sharp disinfl ation in petrol and diesel
narrow remit of monetary policy.
prices in the early part of 2017-18. In the fuel group,
II.1 Consumer Prices
liquefi ed petroleum gas (LPG) prices declined in the
fi rst quarter of 2017-18, tracking international prices. After the January 2017 trough, consumer price
Third, infl ation excluding food and fuel also eased infl ation increased for two months in succession
signifi cantly in Q1:2017-18, pending price revisions to reach 3.9 per cent in March. Thereafter, infl ation
ahead of goods and services tax (GST) implementation. started declining sharply to reach a historic low
1 Headline infl ation is measured by year-on-year changes in all-India CPI Combined (Rural + Urban).

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
of 1.5 per cent in June (Chart II.2), driven by the of goods and services constituting this category came
sequential decline in the momentum of food prices from favourable base effects offsetting positive but
and the overwhelming downward pull of favourable weak momentum (Chart II.3a, b and c).
base effects that took the prices of food items down
The sharp disinfl ation in CPI from 3.7 per cent in the
into a defl ation of (-)1.2 per cent by June. This
second half of 2016-17 to 2.5 per cent in the fi rst half
dramatic decline was accentuated by the dampening
of this year impacted the infl ation distribution. The
of the usual seasonal spikes in prices of vegetables moderation in the central tendency of the distribution
that typically manifest ahead of the onset of the was also accompanied by an increase in kurtosis and
monsoon. Infl ation excluding food and fuel also a considerable negative skew, as against a positive
declined sharply from 5 per cent in March to 3.8 per skew during the corresponding period a year ago
cent by June, after a long hiatus of stickiness. The (Chart II.4). On a seasonally adjusted basis, prices of
sharp disinfl ation during April to June 2017 in prices most items registered increases and the diffusion

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
indices2 for goods, services and the overall CPI were spite of the diversifi cation and weather proofi ng of
well above 50 (Chart II.5). In July and August 2017, the agricultural sector sought to be achieved by policy
the incidence of delayed spikes in prices of vegetables interventions over time. These developments may
within an overall fi rming up of prices of goods and warrant a re-appraisal of the scope and quality of food
services in the run up to the GST implementation management strategies that seem prone to failure in
the face of shocks in either direction. In the past too,
reversed the trajectory of headline infl ation and
supply shocks, of which large one-sided deviations
diffusion indices rose sharply, indicating renewed
of infl ation from projections are merely a symptom,
broad-basing of price pressures.
drove disinfl ation episodes. The softening of oil
II.2 Drivers of Infl ation
prices in conjunction with exchange rate appreciation
A historical decomposition3 of infl ation shows that and the negative output gap, possibly due to weak
large supply shocks dominated the disinfl ation of credit growth, also contributed to the disinfl ation
(Chart II.6a).
the fi rst half of 2017-18, contributing 3.6 percentage
points to it. This confi rms the vulnerability of the Drilling down into granular constituents, non-durable
Indian economy to exogenous shocks, viz., oil prices, goods, which account for 66 per cent of the CPI
and disruptions impacting the agriculture sector in basket and include items such as petrol and diesel
in addition to food items, were the main drivers of
2 The CPI diffusion index, a measure of dispersion of price changes, the disinfl ation. The contribution of services, on
categorises items in the CPI basket according to whether their prices have the other hand, remained broadly unchanged. The
risen, remained stagnant or fallen over the previous month. A reading above
reversal in July and August was driven by infl ation
50 for the diffusion index signals a broad expansion or the extent of
generalisation of price increases and a reading below 50 signals a broad- in non-durables which rebounded, led by food prices
based defl ation.
(Chart II.6b).
3 Historical decompositions are used to estimate the individual contribution
of each shock to movements in infl ation over the sample period based on
Turning to a disaggregated analysis of food infl ation,
a Vector Auto Regression (VAR) with the following variables (represented as
the vector Y): annual growth rate in crude oil prices in Indian rupees, this recent experience with a disinfl ation episode
t
infl ation, output gap measured by using the Hodrick–Prescott fi lter, annual
yields several lessons that should inform the setting
growth rate of rural wages and the policy repo rate. The VAR can be written
in companion form as: Y =c + A Y + e; where e represents a vector of of macroeconomic policies going forward in order to
t t-1 t t
shocks [oil price shock; supply shock (infl ation shock); output gap shock;
pre-empt widespread distress in the farm economy
wage shock; and policy shock]. Using Wold decomposition, Y can be
t
represented as a function of deterministic trend and sum of all the shocks or at least, to mitigate it. The precipitous decline in
e. This formulation allows to decompose the deviation of infl ation from
th t e deterministic trend as the sum of contributions from various shocks. food prices appears to have overwhelmed supply

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
management efforts, despite the fact that the which did not get contemporaneously picked up by
downshift in momentum commenced as early as the agri-information alerts. Also highly unusual were the
second half of 2016-17 and continued well into the spillovers to prices of vegetables other than the usual
fi rst quarter of 2017-18, affording lead time for course suspects – potatoes; onions; tomatoes – indicating
corrections. This decline in food prices during August the extent of dislocation caused by oversupply, since
2016 to June 2017 [(-)2.3 per cent] was in stark contrast other vegetables do not typically exhibit signifi cant
to the pattern of the last fi ve years (2011-12 to 2015- seasonal swings. Second, there was a massive
16) when food prices increased at an average annual defl ation in respect of prices of pulses – (-)24.6 per
rate of 6.3 per cent (Chart II.7). Two factors stand out cent by July-August 2017 contributed by all items
in this experience as noteworthy. First, the unusually in the pulses group (Chart II.8). It was preceded,
low and delayed seasonal upticks in vegetables prices however, by a steady and sizable disinfl ation from the
coincided with larger than usual arrivals in mandis second half of 2015-16 which should have fl ashed in

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
lead monitors of the pulses economy. In the absence prices (import duty of 10 per cent was imposed on tur
of corrective action, the combination of augmented in March 2017 to prevent prices from falling below
availability and inadequate procurement/marketing MSPs); restricting exports (tur, moong and urad dal
operations yielded a supply glut with which food have been made free for exports, effective September
supply management logistics failed to cope. 15, 2017); creating buffer stocks of pulses for the
fi rst time through involvement of agencies such as
As regards specifi c components in the food category,
the Food Corporation of India (FCI), the National
pulses constitute 2.4 per cent of the CPI and 5.2
Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India
per cent of the food category. The decline in prices
Ltd. (NAFED), and the Small Farmers’ Agri Business
of pulses contributed (-)1.4 percentage points to
Consortium (SFAC); discouraging hoarding by putting
the food defl ation during May and June and (-)0.7
stock limits on pulses for traders (which were lifted
percentage points to headline disinfl ation (Chart
in May 2017); and taking measures for revitalising the
II.9). Historically, domestic production and imports
agriculture sector in general.4
of pulses have consistently lagged behind the level of
With the domestic availability of pulses (domestic
domestic demand, resulting in infl ationary pressures
production and imports) increasing to 29.6 million
on the headline. Drawing upon this experience,
tonnes in 2016-17 from 22.2 million tonnes in 2015-
the Government put in place several measures to
16, the prices of pulses declined below their long-
augment supply during 2016-17, which inter alia
term trend as well as the MSPs in several mandis
included increasing the minimum support prices
(Charts II.10a, b and c). This refl ected the large gap in
(MSPs) to incentivise farmers to increase acreage (MSP
procurement relative to supply and the unanticipated
for kharif and rabi pulses increased in the range of
shock to farmers’ expectations on price support.
7.7-9.2 per cent and 14.3-16.2 per cent, respectively,
in 2016-17); continuing zero import duty on pulses to In the case of vegetables, prices fell signifi cantly since
augment domestic availability of pulses at reasonable August 2016, with statistical tests suggesting a trend
4 Measures, inter alia, include issuing soil health cards to all farmers to provide information to farmers on nutrient status of their soil along with
recommendation on appropriate dosage of nutrients to be applied for improving soil health and its fertility; Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana to
help expand cultivated area with assured irrigation, reducing wastage of water and improving water use effi ciency; onboarding 455 markets (out of 585
regulated market) in 13 states on the e-marketing platform under the National Agriculture Market scheme (eNAM) – as on September 8, 2017, 47.95 lakh
farmers and 91,500 traders have registered on the e-NAM portal.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
break5 that altered their evolution incipiently under developments underscore the need for high frequency
the cover of the transitory effects of demonetisation. data and monitoring of prices, mandi arrivals, supply-
A sequence of positive shocks brought about this sub- demand balances and stock positions, especially with
trend deviation. What started off as the reversal of the respect to horticulture.
summer spike in August was followed by the sharp
In Q2 so far, food infl ation has edged up on the back
and more than seasonal winter price correction. Fire-
of a sharp rise in vegetables prices, driven by a spike
sales post demonetisation set the stage for a plunge
in tomato and onion prices (Chart II.11). In the case
in the prices of other vegetables (cabbage; caulifl ower;
of tomatoes, sudden price movements propelled
palak/other leafy vegetables; brinjal; gourd, peas
infl ation in the item from (-)40.8 per cent in June
and beans) during November-December 2016, which
2017 to 49.9 per cent in July and further to 94.0 per
usually exhibit little seasonality, as stated earlier.
cent in August. This was mainly on account of supply
Finally, there has been an unusually soft pickup in
vegetable prices during the early months of 2017
(Charts II.11 and II.12). This was due to large arrivals
of key vegetables during these months. These
5 Monthly series of the CPI vegetable price index from January 2012 to
June 2017 is decomposed into trend, cyclical, seasonal and irregular
components using a univariate unobserved components model (UCM).
The Supremum Wald test indicates a statistically signifi cant break in
August 2016, with the post-break trend sloping negatively. Comparing the
observed vegetable price index with an index constructed by imputing
the pre-break trend on to the post-break decomposition reveals a 6-10
percentage points deviation in infl ation in 2017. Several caveats are in
order: (i) the break is at the end of the sample; (ii) the post-break trend
is negative sloping which means that reduction in prices on an enduring
basis, controlling for other shocks and seasonality, is unlikely; and (iii)
the July and August 2017 data already indicate a sharp reversal in vegetable
prices. These need to be considered while interpreting the break as a
structural change.represented as a function of deterministic trend and
sum of all the shocks e. This formulation allows the decomposition of
t
the deviation of infl ation from its deterministic trend as the sum of
contributions from various shocks.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
facilitating imports and on expectations of higher
domestic production. Infl ation in prices of animal
proteins and milk has declined as momentum was
weak and base effects favourable. Cereal infl ation
remained low and moved with a softening bias due
to higher availability – production was higher and
stocks were up by 5.09 million tonnes.8 Import duty
on wheat that was reduced to zero in December 2016
was re-imposed in March 2017.
In the fuel and light group, infl ation picked up at the
start of the fi nancial year but softened transiently
in May-June before resuming an upturn in July
and August. The decision to allow oil marketing
companies (OMCs) to raise subsidised kerosene and
LPG prices in a calibrated manner has enhanced
the responsiveness of prices of domestic household
disruptions due to farmers’ agitations in Maharashtra fuel items to international price benchmarks. The
in June and adverse weather conditions in important contribution of electricity to overall fuel infl ation
production centres. In early August, upside pressures remained more or less unchanged in H1:2017-18 in
also built up in onion prices, pushing onion infl ation relation to the corresponding period of last year, while
to 49.3 per cent in August from (-)10 per cent in that of fi rewood moderated (Chart II.13). Growth in
July, reportedly due to damage caused by July rains electricity generation9 decelerated during Q1:2017-
and large procurement by a few State Governments. 18 to 5.3 per cent (from a robust base of 10 per cent
The sharp increase in these prices in retail markets last year) on account of subdued performance of
refl ects a statistically signifi cant increase in margins6 the manufacturing sector; though it has accelerated
in Q2:2017-18. Further analysis based on CPI regional
prices data suggests that there is no signifi cant
difference in the changes in vegetable prices in urban
and rural areas – the spike in vegetable prices has
uniformly impacted rural and urban India.7
Among other food items, prices of spices moved into
defl ation territory since June 2017 on account of
a fall in prices of chillies, dhania and black pepper.
As per the 3rd advance estimates of the Ministry of
Agriculture, production of spices recorded a growth
of 17.4 per cent in 2016-17, up from 14.4 per cent a
year ago. Sugar infl ation, which was in double digits
during 2016-17 (averaging 20 per cent), also eased in
2017-18 so far (up to August), largely due to measures
6 Margin is measured as the difference between the retail and the wholesale
price. The increase in margins is statistically signifi cant at 5 per cent level.
The kernel density function also suggests signifi cant increases in onion and
tomato prices and margins across a majority of the centres during July and 8 Total stock of rice, wheat and coarse cereals as at end-August 2017 compared
August as compared to May and June 2017. to end-August 2016.
7 Based on analysis of variance (ANOVA) framework. 9 Electricity generation is based on the index of industrial production (IIP).

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
signifi cantly in the months of July and August with a
growth rate of 7.5 per cent (from 2.1 per cent last year)
with reports of surge in rural demand for irrigation.
The long-term thermal-based power tariff through
power purchasing agreements (PPA) by distribution
companies (DISCOMs), the dominant source of
electricity, has remained broadly unchanged. However,
spot price of electricity reported on energy exchanges,
which was broadly the same as last year till April 2017,
have started rising from May 2017 onwards.
Turning to the underlying infl ation dynamics, CPI
infl ation excluding food and fuel edged down by 120
basis points during the year up to June. The softness
in prices of petrol and diesel within the transport and
communication group contributed substantially to the
observed moderation in Q1 (Chart II.14). Excluding
petrol and diesel prices from this category too, Services infl ation eased during Q1:2017-18 in a broad-
infl ation moderated (Chart II.15). based manner. Infl ation in respect of education
services moderated signifi cantly, possibly on account
The sudden and sharp decline in infl ation excluding
of the revised school fee payment cycle for central
food, fuel, petrol and diesel in Q1:2017-18 was driven
school boards for the academic year. Lower infl ation
by goods as well as services. Among goods, much of the
was recorded in transportation fares as fuel prices
moderation was in prices of personal care and effects
remained range-bound, coupled with food infl ation –
due to a fall in the rate of change of domestic gold
a major determinant of the cost of living – being lower
prices in tandem with international prices. Infl ation
than in the recent past. Prices of mobile communication
in respect of goods within the health sub-group and
expenses eased signifi cantly, triggered by pricing war
clothing also eased, pending price revisions held
in the telecommunication sector. Housing infl ation
back ahead of GST, while clearance sales depressed
also moderated in Q1, refl ecting lower rates of increase
infl ation in the case of clothing (Chart II.16a).
in rentals (Chart II.16b).
Thereafter, in July and August, there was a broad
based pickup in CPI infl ation excluding food and fuel.
Infl ation in transport and communication registered
sharp increase driven by petrol and diesel (Chart
II.14). Household goods and services; pan, tobacco
and intoxicants; health; recreation; and clothing and
footwear sub-groups also rose. This partly refl ected
the hike in the service tax rate under GST and the
impact of GST on certain goods, especially packaged/
processed food; clothing and footwear; and recreation
and amusement services. Housing infl ation reversed
with the implementation of house rent allowance
(HRA) increases by the Centre from July. As a result,
all other exclusion based measures also registered
a pickup in Q2 so far (Chart II.15). The GST was

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
rolled out in July 2017. The assessment at the Other Measures of Infl ation
current juncture is that price changes are not likely
In May 2017, the base year of wholesale price index
to have any material impact on headline infl ation.
(WPI) was revised from 2004-05 to 2011-12 to align it
However, in case the price increases show downward
with the base year of other macroeconomic indicators
rigidity due to uncertainty in GST implementation,
such as gross domestic product (GDP) and the index
infl ationary impact may emerge (Box II.1).
Box II.1: Impact of GST on CPI Infl ation
The goods and services tax (GST) has been half of the CPI basket comprises food items that
implemented from July 1, 2017 with the GST Council attracted zero excise and sales tax and they continue
broadly approving a fi ve-tier rate structure, viz., to be taxed at the zero rate under the new GST rate
0 per cent for commodities such as fruits, vegetables, structure. Furthermore, petrol and diesel are outside
milk, handloom, select agricultural implements and the purview of the GST on which the existing taxation
newspapers; 5 per cent for coal, sugar, tea, coffee, system (VAT and central excise duty) will continue.
edible oil, economy air fares among others; 12 per cent Hence, the impact of GST on CPI stems mainly from
for select processed foods among others; 18 per cent the tax rate differentials in respect of the remaining
for non-durables and most of the services; and 28 per elements of the CPI basket.
cent for most consumer durable goods and recreation
From an item level mapping of the earlier tax rates
services. Non-processed food items, education, health
and the new GST rate structure, it is observed that
care, real estate, electricity and fuel items like petrol
among the major sub-groups, much of the increase
and diesel are exempted from the GST. A rate of 3
in prices post-GST is estimated to occur in prepared
per cent has also been specifi ed for gold. The major
meals, clothing and footwear and other sub-groups
indirect taxes that were subsumed under the GST
dominated by services such as recreation and
include the excise duty, the service tax, Central sales
amusement. The increase in prices of these items is
tax and State value added tax (VAT).
to a large extent likely to be offset by declines in post-
In order to arrive at the direct impact of the GST GST goods prices – particularly those in the household
structure on the CPI, a comparison of the existing goods and services sub-group and personal care and
excise and State VAT/sales tax rates on CPI items effects as well as in select food sub-groups such as
vis-à-vis the GST rate structure is in order. Almost spices and pulses.
(contd.)

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Overall, taking into account the weighted contribution some fast moving consumer goods (FMCG) items
of the changes in the major sub-groups, CPI prices have moderated. In case prices of commodities that
could increase by around 10 basis points on account have gone up show downward rigidity, the weighted
of the new GST rate structure (Chart 1). As such, it is average price increase could be higher at 1.5 per cent
not expected to have any signifi cant impact on CPI [Table 1, Column (4)].
infl ation. Estimates by other agencies also point to a
muted impact of the new GST rate structure on CPI Table 1: Impact of GST on Inflation Based on Survey
infl ation10. Conducted by the RBI in mid-September 2017
However, as noted in the October 2016 MPR (Box II.I: Items Weights in Per cent Max [0,
CPI basket change Per cent
Infl ation Impact of GST – Cross Country Evidence),
change]
the cross-country experience shows a one-off increase
(1) (2) (3) (4)
in prices in the fi rst year following the introduction
Biscuits 0.9 3.9 3.9
of GST. This is likely on account of fi rms choosing
Ice Cream 0.0 7.6 7.6
to increase prices initially in response to the Prepared Sweets 0.6 2.5 2.5
uncertainties surrounding the implementation of a Tea 1.0 -1.5 0.0
new tax system and its impact on business processes. Edible Oil 3.0 0.1 0.1
Shirts 0.6 3.7 3.7
Similar behaviour by fi rms in India in response to GST
Sarees 0.9 5.7 5.7
implementation could result in some upside risk to Leather Shoes 0.2 4.6 4.6
the infl ation assessment presented here. Rubber / PVC Footwear 0.3 3.6 3.6
Televisions 0.2 1.0 1.0
A dip stick survey was conducted by the Reserve Bank Refrigerators 0.1 0.6 0.6
Stainless steel utensils 0.2 2.3 2.3
in select cities to assess the impact of implementation
Pressure-cooker/ Pan 0.0 1.9 1.9
of GST on prices of eighteen commodities. The survey
Electric-bulb / Tubelight 0.2 0.8 0.8
results suggest that the weighted average price of Washing-soap / Powder 0.9 -2.3 0.0
these commodities, with a weight of around 10.0 Motorcycle / Scooter 0.8 -2.9 0.0
per cent in the CPI basket, is likely to have gone up Hair-oil / Shampoo 0.5 0.9 0.9
Toothpaste 0.4 -4.1 0.0
by 0.8 per cent including the regular price change.
Post-GST price rise is witnessed in textiles, footwear Total 10.4 0.8 1.5
and utensils, whereas prices of two-wheelers and Source: RBI survey.
10 The Economic Survey 2016-17 expects that the impact of GST will be of industrial production (IIP). The revision in the base
defl ationary in nature. While some analysts see CPI infl ation recording a year is also intended to capture structural changes
marginal uptick on the back of pickup in prices of food and tobacco, and
in the economy and to improve the quality, coverage
services, few analysts expect that the impact of GST on infl ation will
depend on a variety of factors such as the effi ciency with which the input and representativeness of the index. In addition
tax credit mechanism works and producers pass on tax cuts into fi nal
to an updated item basket, the revised WPI has
prices.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
included two new features in line with international II.3 Costs
best practices: (i) the use of the geometric mean
Underlying cost conditions have largely co-moved
for compilation of item-level indices; and (ii) the
with measures of infl ation, with the pickup in the
exclusion of indirect taxes from wholesale prices,
last quarter of 2016-17 turning out to be transient.
thus bringing it conceptually closer to a producer
Industrial and farm costs captured under the WPI
price index. Refl ecting these changes, headline WPI
eased signifi cantly in Q1:2017-18 (Chart II.18). The
infl ation in the new series declined by an average
fall in global crude oil prices and the easing of metal
of one percentage point as compared with infl ation
prices due to the slowdown of demand from China12,
calculated from the index with 2004-05 as base year
during April 2013 to March 2017.
After peaking in February, WPI infl ation fell sharply up
to June, but ticked up again in July and August following
a sharp pickup in food prices. Between April and July,
CPI trimmed means11 have softened; however, in
August these registered an increase. Median infl ation,
a particular case of the trimmed mean, also declined,
averaging 4.2 per cent since March 2017 (Chart II.17a).
Infl ation measured by sectoral consumer price indices
continued to undershoot headline CPI infl ation,
refl ecting inter alia the higher weight of food in the
former. Changes in GDP and gross value added (GVA)
defl ators have moved along with WPI infl ation since
the beginning of the year (Chart II.17b). In July and
August, the movement in WPI infl ation was consistent
with that of headline CPI and all sectoral CPIs.
12 This is due to China’s efforts to rein in its shadow banking sector from
which credit in the form of off-balance sheet lending has gone to the metal
11 Trimmed means lessen noise by removing select proportions of upper sector through wealth management products. With the tightening of credit,
and lower ends of the distribution corresponding to a chosen percentage China’s economy and its metal demand have been slowing (IMF Commodity
of trim. They are used as indicators of underlying infl ation behaviour. Market Monthly, June 9, 2017).

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
the world’s biggest metals consumer, also contributed
to the signifi cant decline in domestic farm and non-
farm input costs as they got passed on to inputs such
as high speed diesel, aviation turbine fuel, naptha,
bitumen, furnace oil and lube oils. In Q2, metal
prices rose from the June trough, underpinned by
expectations of strong global demand, particularly
from China. However, prices moderated somewhat by
end-September.
Among other industrial raw materials, domestic coal
prices remained range-bound while prices of other
inputs such as fi bres, oil seeds and pulp either declined
or moved with a softening bias; and among farm
sector inputs, diesel prices declined sharply, tracking
international prices. Prices of other agricultural
inputs such as electricity, fertilisers, pesticides and
tractors softened. Due to excess inventory, supply of sector continued to rise as staff cost growth outpaced
fertiliser remained comfortable despite deceleration the growth in value of production.15 The growth in
in production in Q1:2017-18 which softened prices. the ratio of staff costs to value of production in the
Tractor shipments decelerated to 8.0 per cent in manufacturing sector accelerated modestly in the
fi rst quarter of 2017-1816 after declining for the last
Q1:2017-18 (12.1 per cent last year) largely due to
two quarters of 2016-17 (Chart II.20). The value of
destocking in the pre-GST period, with discounts
production for manufacturing companies declined
imparting low momentum to prices. However, the
(probably due to de-stocking undertaken by the
decline in infl ation in both farm inputs and industrial
companies with respect to pre-GST sales) and staff
raw materials was arrested in the August prints as the
costs rose marginally.
prices of urea, high speed diesel and other minerals
oil rose tracking international prices. The cost of raw materials, based on responses of
manufacturing fi rms covered in the Reserve Bank’s
Following the monsoon and the pickup in agricultural
industrial outlook survey, remained high in Q1:2017-
activity, demand for agricultural labourers remained
18, albeit with some moderation in relation to the
strong in 2017-18. This was refl ected in a modest
previous quarter, possibly refl ecting softer commodity
increase in the rate of wage growth for rural
prices. Firms assessed that the cost of raw materials
agricultural labourers, a key determinant of farm costs
remained elevated in Q2 as well; however, their
(Chart II.19). In the organised sector, the decline in
inability to increase selling prices suggests that pricing
growth of unit employee costs in listed private sector
power is still weak. The manufacturing purchasing
companies in manufacturing during 2016-17 reversed
managers’ index (PMI) also suggest that the cost of raw
to register an uptick in Q1:2017-18. However, unit
materials remained high in Q1 and Q2:2017-18, but
employee costs for companies in the services sector
failed to impact selling prices in view of weak pricing
continued to decline in a pattern that has set in since
power. In contrast, the services PMI reported a sharp
Q2:2016-17.13 Unit labour costs14 in the manufacturing
15 Results for Q1:2017-18 are based on 363 common set of services
13 Results for Q1:2017-18 are provisional. companies and are provisional.
14 Unit labour costs is defi ned here as the ratio of staff cost to value of 16 Results for Q1:2017-18 are based on 992 common set of manufacturing
production. companies and are provisional.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
pickup in prices charged in Q2 – the upward revision likely headwinds from temporary price adjustments
in prices likely refl ecting higher tax rates under GST. post-GST, the direct and second round impact of
HRA increases (see MPR, April 2017, Chapter 1) and
Globally, low infl ation across AEs and EMEs is co-
a recovery in demand in the second half of 2017-18
existing with a modest strengthening of demand. In which would narrow the output gap. Consequently,
India, uncertainty surrounds the path of infl ation over the infl ation trajectory is poised to fi rm up over the
the rest of the year. Overall infl ation outcomes going rest of the year. Finally, considerable upside risk to
forward will depend on the durability of the recent infl ation stems also from the rather large scale of state
disinfl ation in food, given that base effects have turned level farm loan waivers and the reports of a likely
unfavourable from August. Furthermore, there are fi scal stimulus (Chapter I, Box I.1).

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
III. Demand and Output
Aggregate demand has been impacted by slowing consumption demand, still subdued investment and a slump in
export performance in the early months of 2017-18. Manufacturing activity, which was dragged down by one-off
effects of the implementation of GST, weighed heavily on aggregate supply conditions. Notwithstanding initial
deceleration, agricultural prospects remain stable and acceleration in services sector activity could impart resilience
to the overall supply situation in the rest of 2017-18.
Aggregate demand slackened in Q1:2017-18 in a
sequence that began a year ago; yet, it surprised
expectations on the downside. Restrained by
languishing investment and a distinct slowdown
in exports, real GDP growth fell below 6 per cent in
Q1:2017-18 for the fi rst time in thirteen quarters.
The deceleration in economic activity would have
been more pronounced, but for the front loading
of public spending which boosted government
consumption and provided a cushion. Private
consumption demand, still the fulcrum of overall
demand in the economy, started losing momentum
in Q4:2016-17 and slumped further in Q1:2017-18.
Although gross fi xed capital formation (GFCF) broke
out of the steady decline since the beginning of
2016-17, the uptick in Q1:2017-18 was weak and will
warrant more incoming data to confi rm if a reversal
has commenced. and further to a thirteen-quarter low of 5.7 per cent
in Q1:2017-18, extending the protracted slowdown
Aggregate supply conditions were fl attened by the loss
that has already spanned fi ve consecutive quarters.
of momentum in agriculture and allied activities in
The loss of momentum was also evident on a
spite of a sharp rise in rabi production. Industrial GVA
seasonally adjusted basis (Chart III.1). Excluding the
slumped to a 20-quarter low in Q1:2017-18, impacted
support from the robust growth of government fi nal
by one-off effects of the implementation of the goods
consumption expenditure (GFCE), real GDP growth
and services tax (GST), rising input costs and the
would have slumped to a mere 4 per cent in Q4:2016-
deepening weakness in aggregate demand. In the
17 and 4.3 per cent in Q1:2017-18, respectively.
services sector, however, an upturn spread to several
Demand conditions were debilitated by a collapse in
constituent parts. Looking ahead, supply conditions
GFCF that set in from Q2:2016-17; even though GFCF
are poised to receive some boost from the agricultural
recovered from contraction, its growth was feeble in
sector and rising expectations of a durable upswing in
Q1:2017-18. Private fi nal consumption expenditure
services. The decline in momentum in manufacturing
(PFCE) slumped in Q1:2017-18 to record the slowest
activity remains an area of signifi cant concern.
growth over the last six quarters. The high growth of
III.1 Aggregate Demand
exports in Q4:2016-17 could not be sustained and a
Measured by year-on-year (y-o-y) changes in real gross levelling off in Q1:2017-18 appears to have prolonged
domestic product (GDP) at market prices, aggregate into Q2 as well. Consequently, net exports depleted
demand decelerated to 6.1 per cent in Q4:2016-17 aggregate demand in the economy (Table III.1).

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Table III.1: Real GDP Growth
(Per cent)
Item 2015-16 2016-17 Weighted 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
contribution
to growth Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
in 2016-17
(percentage
points)*
Private Final Consumption Expenditure 6.1 8.7 4.8 2.8 5.2 6.7 9.3 8.4 7.9 11.1 7.3 6.7
Government Final Consumption Expenditure 3.3 20.8 2.0 0.9 4.3 4.2 4.1 16.6 16.5 21.0 31.9 17.2
Gross Fixed Capital Formation 6.5 2.4 0.7 4.3 3.4 10.1 8.3 7.4 3.0 1.7 -2.1 1.6
Net Exports 15.1 37.4 0.4 1.6 -5.3 27.4 95.3 36.6 59.3 30.8 - -
Exports -5.3 4.5 0.9 -6.1 -4.1 -8.7 -2.3 2.0 1.5 4.0 10.3 1.2
Imports -5.9 2.3 0.5 -5.9 -3.4 -9.9 -4.3 -0.5 -3.8 2.1 11.9 13.4
GDP at Market Prices 8.0 7.1 7.1 7.6 8.0 7.2 9.1 7.9 7.5 7.0 6.1 5.7
*: Component-wise contributions to growth do not add up to GDP growth in the table because change in stocks, valuables and discrepancies
are not included.
Source: Central Statistics Offi ce (CSO).
III.1.1 Private Final Consumption Expenditure
Even as PFCE remained the key driver of aggregate
demand in the economy, contributing 54 per cent to
real GDP, a marked deceleration has characterised
its evolution in Q4:2016-17 and Q1:2017-18 in
comparison with the preceding three quarters
(Chart III.2).
High frequency indicators for urban consumption
paint a mixed picture, with sales of passenger cars and
international air passenger traffi c remaining robust,
but consumer durables production having contracted
(Chart III.3a). Going forward, urban consumption is
expected to revive, following the upward revision in
house rent allowances (HRA) for central government
employees as also the likely implementation of the
7th Central Pay Commission (CPC) award at the sub- demand, viz., growth in sales of two-wheelers and
national level. High frequency indicators of rural tractors, have witnessed sequential improvement in

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
to 29.5 per cent in 2016-17. Although GFCF exhibited a
slender recovery in Q1:2017-18, the overall investment
climate remains bleak. Subdued levels of investment
activity were also refl ected in the contraction of
capital goods production, notwithstanding robust
growth in imports of certain capital goods (III.5a).
The corporate investment cycle is weighed down by
excess capacity in the manufacturing sector. Capacity
utilisation (CU) improved in Q4:2016-17, but it again
dipped in Q1:2017-18, refl ecting weak demand (Chart
III.5b). High levels of stress in the balance sheets of
banks and corporations continued to act as a drag on
investment activity. Besides, households’ investment
in dwellings, other buildings and structures also
remained subdued due to high levels of inventories
of residential houses and expectations of correction
in prices.
the recent months. The production of consumer non-
durables, representing cash-intensive fast moving
According to the Centre for Monitoring Indian
consumer goods (FMCG) demand, has, however,
Economy (CMIE), new investment proposals
decelerated, though still exhibiting high growth
signifi cantly declined in Q2: 2017-18 in terms of
among the components of industrial production
both numbers and value (Chart III.6a). Only 403
(Chart III.3b).
new projects were announced, the lowest since
Retail consumption activity, refl ected in drawals of Q1:2004-05. The implementation of stalled projects
personal loans from scheduled commercial banks still lacks adequate traction – there was a signifi cant
(SCBs), suggests that underlying conditions are increase in stalled projects in Q1:2017-18; however,
supportive of consumption demand, going forward an improvement was reported in Q2:2017-18 (Chart
(Chart III.4). III.6b).
III.1.2 Investment Demand
At the same time, anecdotal evidence suggests that
Investment demand remained depressed, with its awarding and construction of highway projects in the
share in GDP declining from 34.3 per cent in 2011-12 road sector have reached an all-time high and the daily

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
additions of road construction have touched a peak. Consequently, revenue expenditure accounted for
Some momentum in investment activity is also visible about 46 per cent of the budgeted expenditure (Table
in sectors such as electricity transmission, roads and III.2). During Q2 so far (July-August 2017), revenue
renewable power. Going forward, an increase in expenditure propped up GFCE with y-o-y growth of
allocation of capital expenditure by 6.7 per cent in 4.4 per cent (-7.6 per cent in July-August 2016).
2017-18 is expected to generate some multiplier and
Tax revenues (net) were higher during April-August
crowding-in effects, although a durable turnaround
2017 than their levels a year ago on account of higher
in the investment cycle largely hinges on a revival in
collections under corporate and income taxes. Receipts
private investment appetite.
under customs duties, union excise duties and service
III.1.3 Government Expenditure tax moderated, however, mainly due to the ongoing
migration of select indirect taxes to the GST (Chart
As stated earlier, the slowdown in aggregate demand
III.7a). Uncertainty on the revenue front can have
in Q1:2017-18 was cushioned by GFCE. Following
adverse implications for the viability of government
advancement of the announcement of the Union
fi nances, going ahead.
Budget, the Centre undertook massive frontloading
of expenditure. The disbursement of subsidies during The GST Council recommended a four-tier rate
April-August 2017, in particular, increased sharply. structure – 5, 12, 18 and 28 per cent – for the fi tment
of all 1,211 items of goods and services, including
Table III.2: Key Fiscal Indicators – Central exemptions on basic necessities (Chart III.7b). After
Government Finances (April-August)
the introduction of the GST, the total tax incidence
Indicator Actual as per cent of BE on motor vehicles (GST plus Compensation Cess) has
2016-17 2017-18 come down vis-a-vis the total tax incidence in the
1. Revenue Receipts 28.0 27.0 pre-GST regime. Accordingly, the GST Council has
a. Tax Revenue (Net) 26.6 27.8
recommended that the central government moves
b. Non-Tax Revenue 32.5 24.0
legislative amendments for increasing the maximum
2. Total Non-Debt Receipts 12.7 18.4
3. Revenue Expenditure 41.0 45.8 ceiling of cess to be levied on motor vehicles to 25 per
4. Capital Expenditure 37.0 35.4
cent from 15 per cent. Meanwhile, the government
5. Total Expenditure 40.5 44.3
6. Gross Fiscal Deficit 76.4 96.1 has also indicated that it would further rationalise
7. Revenue Deficit 91.8 134.2
rates, depending on the progress of implementation.
8. Primary Deficit 565.9 1401.3
The number of new taxpayers who registered with
BE: Budget estimates.
Source: Controller General of Accounts (CGA). the GSTN up to August 29, 2017 reached around

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
1.9 million. As per the latest information (up to In view of the diffi culties being faced by taxpayers
September 25, 2017), revenue collections under GST in fi ling returns, the dates for fi ling various GSTR
for the month of August amounted to `906.7 billion have been extended. Furthermore, comprehending
as against `940.6 billion for the month of July, 2017.1 GST provisions and their impact on business along
Going forward, the gains from expansion of the tax with the requirements for GST-compliance is still
base due to introduction of the GST and improved premature. Moreover, provisions for anti-profi teering
tax compliance post-demonetisation are expected to as well as the now-deferred e-way bill which tracks
improve tax buoyancy over the medium-term. consignments across states are unclear. After the
fi tment committee observed anomalies in GST levied
Nevertheless, businesses have been facing some IT
on 40 items, the GST Council has lowered taxes
challenges during the initial stage of implementation
on these products. In view of the above, it may be
which are being looked into by the GST Council. After
challenging to realise the projected tax revenues in
GST implementation, exporters can avail input tax
the Union Budget 2017-18.
credit only after sale within the domestic tariff area
or after sending their shipments outside the country. The Centre’s borrowing programme was conducted as
They can subsequently claim the unutilised credit as per the planned issuance schedule within the overall
refund, a process in which their working capital gets contour of its debt management strategy. Following
immobilised, thereby raising their operating cost. As the strategy of front loading of issuances, the central
exporters raised concerns over blockage of refunds government completed 64.1 per cent (58.6 per cent
and working capital on account of rollout of GST, the in corresponding period of 2016-17) of its budgeted
government has decided to refund substantial amount gross borrowings (`5,800 billion) by September 2017
of taxes paid by them to provide immediate relief. (Table III.3). The spate of increased borrowing by the
Table III.3: Government Market Borrowings
(` billion)
Item 2015-16 2016- 17 2017- 18 ( up to Sept 29)
Centre States Total Centre States Total Centre States Total
Net Borrowings 4,406 2,594 7,000 4,082 3,426 7,508 2,493 1,598 4,091
Gross Borrowings 5,850 2,946 8,796 5,820 3,820 9,640 3,720 1,779 5,499
Source: RBI.
1 Press Information Bureau, MoF, GoI, September 26, 2017.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
state governments may, however, exert pressure on of around 4.2 per cent in capital expenditure. This,
the fi nite pool of investible resources and crowd out in turn, might entail deterioration in the quality
private investment. of expenditure with attendant implications for
productivity.
Consolidated state fi nances are budgeted to improve
in 2017-18 on account of a lower gross fi scal defi cit- III.1.4 External Demand
GDP ratio. While the capital expenditure-GDP ratio is
With import growth far outpacing that of exports, the
budgeted to be lower in 2017-18 than in the previous
contribution of net external demand to GDP turned
year, capital outlay is projected to remain unchanged, negative in Q1:2017-18, as in the preceding quarter.
which augurs well for the quality of expenditure. State The slowdown in exports in Q1: 2017-18 was broad-
fi nances, however, are likely to come under stress based and encompassed oil and non-oil segments
during 2017-18 from farm loan waivers announced accounting for 74 per cent of the export basket. During
during the year so far, which are estimated at around July 2017, export growth slowed further despite a
0.5 per cent of GDP, and partial implementation of sharp increase in oil exports, but revived in August
the seventh pay commission recommendations. 2017 largely due to an increase in engineering goods,
This, in turn, has to be fi nanced by additional market electronic goods and drugs and pharmaceuticals
borrowings which push up interest rates, not just for exports. Merchandise import growth accelerated in
the States but for the entire economy. A collateral Q1:2017-18, taking the trade defi cit to its highest
damage could be that private borrowers are crowded level since Q2:2013-14, despite crude oil prices being
out as the cost of borrowing rises. Even if the loan half the level that prevailed in 2013-14 (Chart III.8a).
waiver is accommodated within budgetary provisions, In July-August too, the merchandise trade defi cit
it may force cutbacks in other heads of expenditure. expanded unrelentingly on the back of sustained
Experience has shown that the most vulnerable import demand. Notwithstanding declining oil import
volumes, gold imports grew strongly in Q1:2017-18 in
category is capital expenditure. Illustratively, Uttar
anticipation of GST implementation. However, they
Pradesh, which presented its budget after the
moderated sequentially during June-August 2017 as
announcement of the loan waiver, has built in a decline
stockpiling eased, while remaining high on a y-o-y
in capital outlay and capital expenditure by 26.2 per
basis (Chart III.8b).
cent and 30.4 per cent, respectively, during 2017-18.
On the other hand, Maharashtra, which presented its Among non-oil non-gold imports, which have been
budget before the announcement, projected a decline growing in double digits since Q4:2016-17, pearls

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Net services receipts increased by 15.7 per cent on a
y-o-y basis during Q1: 2017-18 largely driven by a rise
in net earnings from travel, construction and other
business services. While outfl ows of primary income
remain a drag on the current account defi cit (CAD),
a modest rise in secondary income, primarily in the
form of workers’ remittances, provided a partial offset.
Both net FDI and net FPI fl ows to India rose during
Q1:2017-18 over their levels a year ago, attesting to the
attractiveness of the Indian economy as an investment
destination. External commercial borrowings (ECBs)
infl ows also picked up modestly on the back of a sharp
increase in issuance of rupee denominated bonds.
In contrast, net accretion to NRI deposits declined
marginally, refl ecting lower infl ows into Non-Resident
External (NRE) rupee accounts. Refl ecting external
sector resilience, foreign exchange reserves reached
and precious stones, electronics goods, coal and a level of US$ 399.7 billion on September 29, 2017
other goods contributed sizably, underlining the role equivalent to 11.5 months of imports. 2
of international commodity prices and increased
III.2 Aggregate Supply
domestic demand for electric, construction and dairy
machinery even as a decline in imports of transport The cyclical slowdown that set in at the beginning
of 2016-17 pulled the growth of output measured by
equipment coincided with an increase in domestic
gross value added (GVA) at basic prices down to 5.6 per
production (Chart III.9). While there has been a
cent in Q1:2017-18, fl at at the level of the preceding
contraction in domestic production of capital goods,
quarter (Table III.4).
imports of capital goods, except transport equipment,
gradually increased during April-August 2017. Underlying this subdued performance was the
Similarly, higher imports of sugar refl ected domestic depressed state of industrial activity, particularly
consumption exceeding production in 2016-17. manufacturing. Although agricultural and allied
Table III.4: Sector-wise Growth in GVA
(Per cent)
Sector Weighted 2015-16 2016-17 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Contribution
2016-17 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Agriculture and Allied Activities 0.8 0.7 4.9 2.4 2.3 -2.1 1.5 2.5 4.1 6.9 5.2 2.3
Industry 1.6 10.2 7.0 7.7 9.2 12.0 11.9 9.0 6.5 7.2 5.5 1.5
Mining and Quarrying 0.1 10.5 1.8 8.3 12.2 11.7 10.5 -0.9 -1.3 1.9 6.4 -0.7
Manufacturing 1.4 10.8 7.9 8.2 9.3 13.2 12.7 10.7 7.7 8.2 5.3 1.2
Electricity, gas, water supply and other utilities 0.2 5.0 7.2 2.8 5.7 4.0 7.6 10.3 5.1 7.4 6.1 7.0
Services 4.3 9.1 6.9 8.9 9.0 9.0 9.4 8.2 7.4 6.4 5.7 7.8
Construction 0.1 5.0 1.7 6.2 1.6 6.0 6.0 3.1 4.3 3.4 -3.7 2.0
Trade, hotels, transport, communication 1.5 10.5 7.8 10.3 8.3 10.1 12.8 8.9 7.7 8.3 6.5 11.1
Financial, real estate and professional services 1.2 10.8 5.7 10.1 13.0 10.5 9.0 9.4 7.0 3.3 2.2 6.4
Public administration, defence and other services 1.4 6.9 11.3 6.2 7.2 7.5 6.7 8.6 9.5 10.3 17.0 9.5
GVA at Basic Prices 6.6 7.9 6.6 7.6 8.2 7.3 8.7 7.6 6.8 6.7 5.6 5.6
Source: Central Statistics Office (CSO).
2 Calculated using imports of four quarters up to June 2017.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
activities also decelerated sequentially from Q3:2016- 18 (Chart III.10). However, seasonally adjusted
17, they were in alignment with the typical outturn q-o-q annualised GVA growth suggests a modest
in the fi rst quarter of the year. Services sector activity, strengthening of momentum in Q1:2017-18 vis-à-vis
Q4:2016-17 (Chart III.11).
however, posted a strong performance, dispelling
the slack that had manifested itself through 2016- The April MPR had projected GVA growth of 6.7 per
17. In fact, the deceleration of GVA was cushioned cent for Q1:2017-18. The actual outcome undershot
by continuing strong growth in public administration, this projection by more than a full percentage
defence and other services (PADO) growth, a point, indicative of the larger than expected loss
of momentum (Chart III.12). The unexpected
constituent of the services sector which has been
moderation in allied activities weighed heavily on
buoyed by frontloading of Government expenditure
the rate of growth of agricultural sector. In addition,
in Q1:2017-18. Excluding this component, the GVA
the deceleration in the manufacturing sector refl ected
growth would have slipped to 5 per cent in Q1:2017-
uncertainties surrounding GST implementation and
higher than expected rise in input costs.
III.2.1 Agriculture
Agriculture and allied activities recorded a signifi cant
deceleration in Q1:2017-18 from Q4:2016-17,
notwithstanding the jump of 8.5 per cent in rabi
foodgrain production, the highest growth recorded in
the last 13 years. Moreover, the area under horticulture
grew by 2.6 per cent in 2016-17 from a year ago, while
production increased by 4.8 per cent, reaching a record
of 300 million tonnes. The moderation in agricultural
GVA growth in relation to the preceding quarters
mainly refl ects the slowdown in ‘livestock products,
forestry and fi sheries’.
South-west monsoon rainfall was higher than the long
period average (LPA) till the fourth week of July, but

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
turned signifi cantly weak thereafter (Chart III.13). As per cent, resulting in contraction in the area sown
of September 30, 2017, out of the 36 sub-divisions under key crops (Chart III.14).
in the country, 30 divisions received excess/normal
Although kharif sowing started on a high note, the
rainfall, while the remaining divisions (east and west
UP, Haryana, Chandigarh & Delhi, Punjab, east MP and momentum slowed down in August due to a lull in
Vidarbha), covering 17 per cent of the sub-divisional the south-west monsoon and lower than expected
area of the country, received defi cient rainfall. In increase in MSPs (Table III.5) and decline in wholesale
terms of the production weighted rainfall index prices of major food items across mandis on account
(PRN), rainfall was lower than the previous year by 5 of the bumper harvest. The latest data suggest that
Table III.5: Minimum Support Price (MSP) for Kharif Crops
MSP (Rs/Quintal) y-o-y growth in per cent
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2016-17 2017-18
Paddy Common 1410 1470 1550 4.3 5.4
Paddy (F)/Grade 'A' 1450 1510 1590 4.1 5.3
Jowar-Hybrid 1570 1625 1700 3.5 4.6
Jowar-Maldandi 1590 1650 1725 3.8 4.5
Bajra 1275 1330 1425 4.3 7.1
Ragi 1650 1725 1900 4.5 10.1
Maize 1325 1365 1425 3.0 4.4
Tur (Arhar) 4625 5050 5450 9.2 7.9
Moong 4850 5225 5575 7.7 6.7
Urad 4625 5000 5400 8.1 8.0
Groundnut 4030 4220 4450 4.7 5.5
Sunflower Seed 3800 3950 4100 3.9 3.8
Soyabean Black 2600 2775 3050 6.7 9.9
Soyabean Yellow 2600 2775 3050 6.7 9.9
Sesamum 4700 5000 5300 6.4 6.0
Nigerseed 3650 3825 4050 4.8 5.9
Medium Staple Cotton 3800 3860 4020 1.6 4.1
Long Staple Cotton 4100 4160 4320 1.5 3.8
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Government of India.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
sowing picked up again in September; however, kharif period last year. This could pose a challenge to the
sowing for the year as a whole has remained lower attainment of the crop production target set at 274.6
than last year’s acreage (Chart III.15). In terms of million tonnes for 2017-18.
crops, sown area was lower in the case of rice, coarse
III.2.2 Industrial Sector
cereals, oilseeds pulses and jute and mesta, but it
was higher in the case of sugarcane and cotton (Chart Industrial GVA growth dipped to 1.5 per cent in
III.16). According to the fi rst advance estimate (AE), Q1 of 2017-18 – the lowest in the last 20 quarters,
the production of kharif foodgrains for 2017-18 at
mainly due to GST-related uncertainties. The index
134.7 million tonnes was 2.8 per cent lower than last
of industrial production (IIP) exhibited a broad-based
year (4th AE).
deceleration in Q1. Large negative production effects
Water storage levels in 91 reservoirs across the partly offset positive base effects, especially in April
country were lower at 66 per cent of the full reservoir and July (Chart III.17a). On a use-based analysis, the
level (74 per cent last year) as on September 28, 2017. output of both capital goods and consumer durables
Apart from the northern region, reservoirs in all other contracted, highlighting weak investment appetite and
regions received less water than in the corresponding slowing consumption demand. In terms of weighted

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
contributions, the slowdown was led by capital goods, period. While renewable energy has made rapid strides
followed by intermediate goods (Chart III.17b). due to falling costs and Government’s incentives,
reports suggest that some of these projects are facing
Acceleration in consumer non-durables was driven
challenges in terms of collapse in prices resulting in
mainly by the contribution of a single item, viz.,
low tariffs/renegotiations of tariffs, weak demand
digestive enzymes and antacids (DEA); excluding this
and exhausted tax benefi ts. These factors have raised
component, the overall index would have contracted
concerns about the viability of such projects. Going
by 0.2 per cent in July 2017 as compared with the
forward, this segment may remain subdued until
growth of 2.2 per cent in July 2016 (Chart III.18a). Of
there is a signifi cant pick-up in demand.
the 23 industry groups that form the manufacturing
sector, production in 15 industries contracted during The slowdown in IIP mirrored the lukewarm
July 2017. The strong performance in a few industries performance of eight core industries, except natural
such as pharmaceuticals and transport equipment gas, coal and electricity. Contraction in cement,
was pulled down by a broad-based slowdown in fertilisers and crude oil accentuated the overall
other industries, most notably electrical equipment slowdown. Early indicators for 2017-18 point to
(Chart III.18b). subdued industrial activity. The 79th round of the
The sharp deceleration in manufacturing in Q1:2017-
18 was due to a combination of factors playing out
simultaneously. While the uncertainties relating
to GST implementation affected overall business
sentiment, value added declined as sales decelerated
and expenditure accelerated (Chart III.19).
The mining and quarrying segment, which showed
some signs of revival in the second half of 2016-17,
sank back again to contraction mode in Q1:2017-
18. Although natural gas production has sustained
the revival that set in from the second half of the
previous year, contraction in crude oil production and
subdued coal production pulled down mining output.
Contraction in coal production was on account of
lower demand for electricity generation, which has
undergone signifi cant transformation in the recent

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
In the housing sector, new units launched have slowed
down although units sold have shown an uptick in
some cities in recent quarters (Chart III.21a and b).
This is expected to continue as the industry gears up
for further consolidation, and as greater clarity on the
implementation of Real Estate Regulatory Act (RERA)
across States emerges.
With large unsold inventories, property prices
showed a correction in Q4:2016-17 in major cities
(Chart III.22a). Cement production – an indicator of
construction activity – is still in contraction mode,
while steel consumption improved in recent months
(Chart III.22b).
Activity in trade, hotels, transport and communication,
which was affected post-demonetisation, bounced
back to register a fi ve-quarter high growth of 11.1
per cent in Q1:2017-18. Indirect taxes, a major
Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey (IOS)
indicator of activity of this segment, grew by 14 per
signaled subdued demand conditions in Q2:2017-18.
cent in Q1:2017-18. Most of the lead indicators of
III.2.3 Services activity in this segment, viz., foreign tourist arrivals,
international passenger and air freight traffi c,
The services sector, which decelerated sequentially
railway traffi c, and telephone subscribers showed an
through 2016-17, recorded a signifi cant improvement
uptick in recent months. Financial, real estate and
in Q1:2017-18 (7.8 per cent, up from 5.7 per cent in
professional services also accelerated in Q1:2017-18,
Q4:2016-17), driven mainly by trade, hotels, transport
partly refl ecting robust value addition by information
and communication as well as public administration,
technology companies in the professional services
defence and other services. Financial, real and
segment.
professional services also showed improvement
in Q1:2017-18. Although the construction sector The fi nancial sector’s growth decelerated in the recent
switched from contraction mode in Q4:2016-17 into period, mirrored in weak growth in aggregate deposits
expansion, it may be too early to conclude that the and bank credit. Notwithstanding low credit growth,
upturn is durable (Chart III.20). high deposit growth in the second half of 2016-17

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
had helped in propping up activity in this sub-sector, measure of the cyclical component of aggregate demand,
maintaining the weighted average of the two. In infi rmities arise from the fact that the output gap is
Q1:2017-18, however, both credit growth and deposit unobservable and needs to be estimated from the data.
growth declined, pulling down the sub-sectoral activity As different fi ltering techniques are highly sensitive to
(Chart III.23). As in the previous quarter, public the choice of period, methodology and the availability
administration, defence and other services benefi tted of data, a pragmatic approach is followed by staff that
from higher revenue expenditure of the Centre in involves various methodologies including univariate
Q1 and continued to provide support to GVA growth fi lters like Baxter-King (BK), Hodrick–Prescott (HP) and
(Chart III.24). Christiano- Fitzgerald (CF), Multivariate Kalman fi lters
(MVKF) and production functions. A fi nance adjusted
III.3 Output Gap
measure of the output gap, which controls for the
The output gap measured by the deviation of actual imbalances emanating from the fi nancial sector, has
output from its potential level and expressed as a also been introduced in this MPR (Box III.1). All these
percentage of potential output, is a gauge of demand output gap measures are aggregated by using principal
conditions. Despite its usefulness as a summary component analysis in order to construct a composite

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Box III.1: Finance Neutral Output Gap
The estimation of potential output - the level of output cycles, real credit growth and real asset price growth
that an economy can produce sustainably over the were included along with the real policy rate to estimate
medium-term consistent with low and stable infl ation the output gap in a semi-structural multivariate Kalman
– enables an assessment of the output gap as the fi lter framework.
deviation of actual output from this potential level.
The fi nance neutral output gap was estimated using
Conventional estimates of the output gap largely ignore
quarterly data from Q1:2006-07 to Q1:2017-18 by the
the role of fi nancial sector (Borio et al., 2016). The pre-
quasi maximum likelihood method on the following
global fi nancial crisis (GFC) period was characterised
state space model:
by high output growth, benign infl ation and fi nancial
sector imbalances emanating from rapid growth in (1)
credit and asset prices, which eventually culminated in
(2)
the GFC in 2008. It is plausible for infl ation to remain
low and stable in times when output growth is on an (3)
unsustainable path due to buildup of imbalances in
represents output gap whereas and denote GVA
fi nancial sector. Taking these into consideration Borio
at basic prices and potential output respectively (both
et al. (2016) present an alternate measure of the output
in log term). G represents growth rate of potential
gap – “fi nance neutral output gap” – which incorporates t
output and is a vector of explanatory variables –
the role of fi nancial sector variables in the evolution of
real policy rate, real credit growth and real asset price
economic cycles.
returns with appropriately chosen lags3 ; and each
India also recorded high credit and asset prices growth represent normally and independently distributed
along with rising output growth and moderately low error terms. The set of equations (1) to (3) represents
infl ation in the pre-GFC period. For instance, during an approximation of economic theory, incorporating
2002-03 to 2007-08 the average annual growth in non- fi nancial sector developments. The output gap
food credit and annual return on assets (measured
obtained by this methodology remained mostly
by the Sensex) were 27 per cent and 32 per cent,
negative over the last two years. In 2015-16 and the
respectively, while the CPI infl ation was, on an average,
fi rst half of 2016-17, the fi nance neutral output gap
about 5 per cent. Output growth was close to double
was lower relative to the output gap estimated from
digits during 2005-06 to 2007-08 (Chart a).
a one sided Hodrick–Prescott fi lter. However, the
Guided by empirical evidence of a signifi cant two output gap measures have converged in recent
relationship between fi nancial factors and business quarters (Chart b).
(Contd...)
3 Lags are chosen based on the univariate analysis, cross correlations and OLS regression, while ensuring convergence of the optimisation algorithm.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
The historical decomposition of the output gap, References:
portraying the contribution of various factors on its
Borio, C., Disyatat, P., & Juselius, M. (2016), “Rethinking
evolution, suggests that fi nancial factors have been
Potential Output: Embedding Information about the
contributing negatively to the output gap since 2012-13
Financial Cycle’’, Oxford Economic Papers, 69(3), 655-
(Rath et.al, 2017) (Chart c). High infl ation and low real
677.
interest rates during the period 2010-13 contributed
positively to the output gap. More recently, subdued Rath, D.P., Mitra, P. and John, J. (2017), “A Measure of
credit growth has contributed negatively to demand Finance-Neutral Output Gap for India”, RBI Working
conditions. Paper Series, WPS (DEPR): 03 / 2017.
measure (Chart III.25 a and b). This measure others such as port traffi c and domestic air freight
indicates that the output gap has been negative since traffi c still show tepid growth. The Government’s
Q3:2016-17. initiatives in essential infrastructure, affordable
housing, improved customer protection and
Conclusion
transparency through the real estate regulatory act
Early indicators for Q2:2017-18 point to subdued should be positive for construction activity, if they
industrial activity, in particular in the manufacturing are implemented with speed and effi ciency. The
sector. While many high frequency services sector GST is likely to result in greater formalisation of the
indicators show signs of improvement, some economy in due course as fi rms register to receive

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
input tax credits even though teething problems 7th CPC announced by States. The key to achieving
remain a challenge at the current juncture. Improved a higher growth trajectory lies, however, in reviving
prospects for rural incomes during 2017-18, higher investment activity. Major structural reforms already
MSPs, and large budgetary allocations for MGNREGA initiated, including the GST, enactment of the
could lead to improvement in rural demand. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC), the likely
Household consumption demand in urban areas recapitalisation of public sector banks and speedy
may get a boost from the upward revision in HRA for resolution of stressed assets augur well for the
government employees and implementation of the outlook.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
IV. Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Financial market conditions in the first half of 2017-18 remained stable, with the weighted average call money
rate (WACR) moving progressively closer to the policy repo rate, stock markets scaling new highs, bond yields
oscillating with fluctuations in inflation readings and the foreign exchange market buoyed by large portfolio flows.
Credit offtake from risk-averse banks remained low, though monetary policy transmission strengthened for new
loans in conditions of sizable surplus liquidity.
Through the first half of 2017-18, global financial with an appreciating bias on the back of waves of
markets were lifted by record low volatility, declining portfolio flows. Markets were impacted in September
credit spreads and stretched market valuations, as by the announcement of the Fed that it will initiate
concerns about the pace of reflation and normalisation balance sheet normalisation in October and certain
of monetary policy in advanced economies (AEs) domestic developments, in particular, higher inflation
receded. Equity markets scaled new peaks relative to print and concerns about the rise in the fiscal deficit,
earnings, propelled by a renewed reach for returns. leading to hardening of yields, correction in stock
Bond yields, which had firmed up till early 2017, prices and depreciation of the rupee. Deposit rates
reversed course from April on softer than expected declined as banks were flush with liquidity. Credit
commodity prices and expectations of a more relaxed flows from banks improved modestly, though still
hamstrung by stressed assets induced deleveraging
pace of monetary policy normalisation in the US on
and weak investment demand. A cumulative 200 basis
easing inflation risks. The US dollar depreciated against
points (bps) cut in the repo rate since January 2015
major currencies, partly correcting for the upside
has been, by and large, transmitted to lending rates
it had gained post-Presidential elections in the US.
on new loans; however, transmission to past loans
Geopolitical risks, however, sparked bouts of volatility
remains incomplete.
in August. Global financial markets remained largely
resilient to the September communication of the IV.1 Financial Markets
Federal Reserve on its balance sheet normalisation.
Different market segments in the domestic financial
Financial markets in emerging market economies
system responded variedly to domestic cues, with
(EMEs) remained tranquil, with equity markets
the impact of global spillovers remaining relatively
surging and the return of large portfolio flows exerting
contained until mid-September. Excess liquidity in
appreciation pressures on their currencies.
money markets, high valuations in the bond and
Domestic financial markets were influenced by a equity markets and an upside tone in the forex market
variety of factors: the dramatic swings in inflation; co-existed with subdued activity in the credit market
surplus liquidity conditions; the implementation in the first half of 2017-18.
of GST; and remonetisation. The weighted average IV.1.1 Money Market: A large liquidity overhang,
call money rate (WACR) – the operating target of fuelled mainly by the front-loading of government
monetary policy – moved closer to the policy repo spend, which necessitated frequent recourse to
rate, notwithstanding persistent surplus liquidity ways and means advances (WMAs) and overdrafts
conditions. Equity markets were buoyed to new (ODs) over the greater part of this period, imparted
peaks by a surge in investment by mutual funds, a downside bias to overnight money market rates in
even as foreign portfolio investment reached close H1 of 2017-18. While the liquidity adjustment facility
to exhausting macro-prudential limits in some debt (LAF) corridor was narrowed from +/- 50 bps to +/- 25
markets. Corporate bond yields softened, tracking bps in April 2017, active liquidity operations (described
G-sec yields and moderation in credit spreads. The in Section IV.3) progressively whittled away at the
exchange rate of the rupee moved in a narrow range, overhang and narrowed the spread between the WACR

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
and the policy rate from 31 bps in April to 13 bps in Other money market rates traded in alignment with
September (Charts IV.1 and IV.2). In combination with the WACR (Chart IV.5). In view of comfortable access to
the liquidity impact of the RBI’s forex operations and liquidity and weak demand for credit, banks reduced
scheduled redemptions of G-secs, these autonomous their recourse to certificates of deposit (CDs). Fresh
flows more than offset the liquidity tightening impact issuances of CDs were lower at `1,302 billion during
of remonetisation. H1 of 2017-18 (up to September 1, 2017) as against
Money market rates adjusted seamlessly to the `1,518 billion during the corresponding period of
narrowing of the LAF corridor. Virtually no effect was 2016-17. With the lower-than-expected CPI inflation
observed on volumes traded in the call money market reading in May 2017, money market rates traded with
(Charts IV.3 and IV.4). Empirical evidence suggests an easing bias, especially in the secondary segments.
that volatility in the WACR has a relatively muted role Since May 12, 2017, 3-month commercial paper (CP),
in monetary policy transmission (Box IV.1). 3-month CDs and 91-day Treasury Bill (T-Bill) rates

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Box IV.1: Operating Target Volatility and Monetary Policy Transmission
High volatility in the operating target can potentially GARCH term), and volatility observed in the previous
dampen transmission of monetary policy. Changes in period (the ARCH term), which is augmented to capture
long-term interest rates, which are vital to monetary the impact of dummies mentioned earlier. The results
policy transmission for infl uencing aggregate demand, suggest that the volatility in the WACR is persistent
are conditioned by the expected path of future short- (Table IV.B.1).
term rates and variations in the term premium. Higher
volatility in overnight rates can potentially spillover into Table IV.B.1: Conditional Volatility of
WACR using GARCH (1,1)*
the term premium, thereby infl uencing “equilibrium
levels of nominal and real long-term rates and
Dependent Variable: WACR
disturbing the transmission mechanism of monetary
Co- p-value Co- p-value
policy impulses” (Colarossi and Zaghini, 2009). In effi cient effi cient
the empirical literature, the transmission of volatility Mean Equation Volatility Equation
from the overnight interest rate along the yield curve
Constant -0.001 0.19 RESID(-1)^2 0.244 0.00
is typically validated by the statistical signifi cance of
WACR -0.24 0.00 GARCH(-1)^2 0.756 0.00
conditional volatility relating the overnight rate in Repo Rate 0.8 0.03 Dum_March 0.342 0.00
variants of generalised autoregressive conditional Net Liquidity 0.002 0.00
ECM -0.050 0.00
heteroscedasticity (GARCH) specifi cations. Country
Dum_March 1.186 0.00
experiences yield scant evidence of transmission of
Dum_April -1.413 0.00
volatility from the overnight rate. Pro-active liquidity
Dum_Taper 0.136 0.00
management and greater transparency along with more D3 0.039 0.00
effective communication may help in better anchoring D10 0.004 0.09
D11 -0.010 0.00
of market expectations (Osborne, 2016).
D13 -0.004 0.04
With a view to studying the impact of conditional T-DIST. DOF 3.244 0.000
Q(10) 12.446 0.256
volatility of the WACR – the operating target of
Q(20) 23.144 0.282
monetary policy in India – on interest rates across the
ARCH LM (5) 0.430 0.828
term structure, the following GARCH (1,1) mean and
*: Using dalily data since January 2009.
volatility equations were specifi ed. Source: RBI staff estimates.
Mean equation: Conditional volatility of the WACR extracted from
equations (1) and (2) is then used as an explicit
determinant of daily change in other interest rates
…(1)
(i.e., nominal yield on government paper of 3-month,
6-month, 9-month, 12-month, 2-year and 10-year
Variance equation:
maturities), in their respective mean and volatility
… (2) equations, while retaining the same structural
specifi cations as in equations 1 and 2. The coeffi cients
where denotes the daily WACR, o is the policy repo
t of conditional volatility of WACR in the mean and
rate, liq is the daily net LAF position and represents
t variance equations of other interest rates are reported
daily change in respective variables. The impact of
in Table IV.B.2.
specifi c developments on the WACR – such as the taper
tantrum, demonetisation, year-end liquidity effects, Two inferences could be derived from these results:
and fortnightly reserve maintenance patterns of banks (a) WACR volatility is not a statistically signifi cant
– are controlled for through the use of dummy variables determinant of the mean values of daily changes
represented by DX. in other interest rates across the yield curve; and
t
(b) even while WACR volatility has a statistically
The conditional variance equation (2) helps identify the
signifi cant conditioning infl uence on the volatility of
time-varying volatility of the residuals generated from
other interest rates, particularly up to one year tenor,
the mean equation (1). is expressed as a function
the values of the relevant coeffi cients are too small
of the weighted average of its long-term average (the
constant term), the last period forecast variance (the (contd...)

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Table IV.B.2: Impact of WACR Volatility Across the Term-structure of Interest Rates*
(coeffi cients)
3-month TB 6-month TB 9-month TB 12-month TB 2-year G-sec 10-year G-sec
Mean equation -0.0059 -0.0019 -0.0042 -0.0044 -0.0001 -0.0003
(0.31) (0.65) (0.35) (0.42) (0.52) (0.94)
Variance equation 0.0004 0.0002 0.0003 0.0008 0.0000 0.0001
(0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.04) (0.00)
*: Using daily data since January 2009.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate the p-values.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
to impact the transmission of monetary policy. A one References:
percentage point increase in volatility of the WACR
Matthew Osborne (2016), “Monetary Policy and
is estimated to increase the volatility of short-term
Volatility in the Sterling Money Market”, Bank of
yields by about 0.02 to 0.08 bps, while the impact on
England Staff Working paper No. 588, April.
volatility of longer-term yields is even more negligible.
These fi ndings suggest that occasional surges in Silvio Colarossi, and Andrea Zaghini (2009),
volatility triggered by specifi c developments are likely “Gradualism, Transparency and the Improved
anticipated and contained quickly through proactive Operational Framework: A Look at Overnight Volatility
liquidity management, which helps avert any potential Transmission”, International Finance, Volume 12, Issue
impediments to the transmission of monetary policy. 2, Summer, Pages 151–170.
declined by 15 bps, 20 bps and 20 bps, respectively. demand from foreign portfolio investors, and the
After the repo rate was cut in August 2017, the 25 bps cut in the repo rate by the Monetary Policy
3-month CD and 91-day T-Bill rates declined by about Committee (MPC) in August 2017. However, G-sec
10 bps and 5 bps, respectively, while the 3-month CP yields hardened thereafter reacting to the higher-
rate inched up by about 4 bps, indicating that markets than-expected August inflation print and the Fed
had already priced in a repo rate cut.
communication on September 20, 2017 signalling one
IV.1.2 Government Securities (G-sec) Market: G-sec more possible rate hike in 2017 and the initiation of
yields generally softened during the most part of H1 balance sheet normalisation from October 2017 (Chart
of 2017-18, driven by lower inflation data, sustained IV.6). Market concerns about the likely increase in the

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
domestic fiscal deficit due to a possible fiscal stimulus on the faster-than-expected rise in August headline
to boost the economy also impacted yields. inflation, the prospect of a fiscal stimulus in India,
and the Fed communication of September 20, 2017, as
G-sec yields hardened by 12 bps in early April in
mentioned earlier.
anticipation of oversupply of paper because of the
likely use of market stabilisation scheme (MSS) and Persisting positive yield differentials with the rest
open market operations (OMOs) by the RBI to absorb of the world and the stable exchange rate of the
surplus liquidity. Two developments in the month of rupee created congenial conditions for foreign
May, however, contributed to considerable softening portfolio inflows. Net foreign portfolio investment
of yields (Chart IV.7). First, a new benchmark in G-secs was `617 billion (including investment in
Government of India Security of 10-year tenor (NI state development loans of `26.2 billion) during H1,
GS 2027) was auctioned on May 12, 2017 at a cut-off resulting in 99 per cent of the limit for FPI investment
of 6.79 per cent, evincing an enthusiastic bid-cover in G-secs being utilised1. FPIs continued to be net
ratio of 6.61. Second, the CSO’s May 12 release on
buyers in the debt market in every month during H1
CPI – coinciding with the date of auction of the new
(Chart IV.8).
benchmark – showed headline inflation softening in
In the short end of the G-sec market, the impact of
April 2017. In June, yields softened even further in
the larger supply of paper – issuances of T-Bills of `1
response to headline inflation for May 2017 printing
trillion under the MSS and of cash management bills
lower.
(CMBs) cumulatively aggregating to `2.5 trillion – was
In Q2, CPI inflation’s historic low reading for June 2017
reflected in the hardening of T-Bills rates during H1
at 1.5 per cent combined with the normal progress
(Chart IV.9).
of the monsoon further boosted sentiment in the
Issuances of state development loans (SDLs) remained
G-sec market. With the July CPI inflation moving up,
subdued in Q1 of 2017-18, but picked up in Q2.
however, expectations reversed and yields commenced
The spread of SDLs’ cut-off over the 10-year G-sec
hardening in August, notwithstanding the 25 bps cut
remained in the range of 74-87 bps in September 2017
in the repo rate. Notably, the normalisation of the US
monetary policy during H1 of 2017 (on March 15 and
on June 14) did not have much influence on domestic
yields. However, G-sec yields hardened thereafter
1 On September 28, 2017, the limits for FPI investment in G-secs and SDLs
for the October-December quarter were increased by `80 billion and `62
billion, respectively.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
during H1 of 2017-18 (up to September 29, 2017) was
`626 billion.
There is no significant relationship between the
borrowing spreads on SDLs and States’ fiscal deficits
and debt positions. The inter-State spread was, on
average, within 9 bps during H1 of 2017-18 as against
7 bps in 2016-17 and 2015-16. Cost considerations
have drastically reduced the dependence of State
Governments on the National Small Savings Fund
(NSSF). Following the recommendations of the 14th
Finance Commission (FC), all States (barring four3)
have been allowed to be excluded from the NSSF
financing facility beginning 2016-17. The share of
market borrowings, which can be raised at relatively
lower costs, particularly when markets do not
differentiate between States on the basis of their
respective fiscal deficits and debt, has increased,
as compared with 77-81 bps in April 2017 (Chart IV.10).
including for discharging past NSSF liabilities.
In H1 of 2017-18, there were no issuances of Ujwal
DISCOM Assurance Yojana (UDAY) bonds in contrast IV.1.3 Corporate Bond Market: Corporate bond yields
to 2016-17 when thirteen States issued UDAY bonds softened during H1 of 2017-18, tracking the decline
of `1,091 billion as against `990 billion issued by in G-sec yields (Chart IV.11a). The decline in 5-year
eight States in the previous year2. The total secondary AAA corporate yield was, however, interspersed with
market trading volume (face value) of UDAY bonds occasional spikes at the end of June and in early-July.
The spread of 5-year AAA rated corporate bonds over
5-year G-secs declined by 56 bps, possibly reflecting
improvement in overall credit risk perceptions
on expectation of faster resolution of stressed
assets under the Banking Regulation (Amendment)
Ordinance promulgated on May 4, 2017. The average
daily turnover in the corporate bond market increased
sharply to `73.2 billion during April-August 2017
from `47.5 billion during the corresponding period
of last year. Resources mobilised through issuances
of corporate bonds in the primary market increased
by 7.1 per cent to `2,770 billion during April-August
2017 from `2,588 billion a year ago. Of the total
resources mobilised from the private corporate bond
market, private placements constituted 98.6 per cent
(Chart IV.11b).
Foreign portfolio investment (FPI) in corporate bonds
2 The spread on UDAY bonds during 2016-17 declined to 35-75 bps over the
corresponding tenor/10-year FIMMDA G-sec yield as compared with a fi xed increased to `2.42 trillion as on September 28, 2017
spread of 75 bps in 2015-16. Approximately 45 per cent of total UDAY bond from `1.86 trillion at end-March 2017. As a result,
issuances in 2016-17 were concentrated in Q4. The large volume of SDL
issuances, including UDAY, was one of the major factors that resulted in a
widening of weighted average spread on SDLs to 83 bps in Q4 of 2016-17. 3 Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala and Arunachal Pradesh.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
the utilisation of the approved limit rose to 99.2 per on July 26, 2017. Upbeat market sentiment appeared
cent from about 76 per cent at end-March 2017. On impervious to the perception of overvaluation in terms
September 22, 2017, the Reserve Bank announced of a high price to earnings ratio (about 23.4) at end-
the removal of Masala bonds or rupee denominated September 2017 relative to AEs (21.0) and EMEs (15.8).
bonds issued overseas from the corporate bond Market ebullience was largely generated by domestic
investment limit effective October 3, 2017. This will factors: expectations of reform intensification after
release additional space for investment by FPIs in introduction of the GST; the resolution of bank
corporate bonds. The total investment in Masala bonds stressed assets and smooth progress of the insolvency
amounted to `440 billion at end-September 2017. regime; satisfactory monsoon; and lower inflation
The stable exchange rate of the rupee, uncertainty in May and June. The BSE Sensex gained 5.6 per
around policies of the US administration, and market cent during H1 of 2017-18 (Chart IV.12a). Net buying
expectations of a more gradual Fed normalisation by domestic institutional investors, particularly by
increased the attractiveness of Indian bonds. mutual funds, overwhelmed volatile foreign portfolio
flows and sustained the rally (Chart IV.12b).
IV.1.4 Stock Market: The equity market remained
buoyant through the greater part of H1 of 2017-18, After a late April recovery from downside global cues
with the BSE Sensex crossing the 32,000 mark on July and sporadic volatility in June, stock markets surged
13, 2017 and the NSE Nifty crossing the 10,000 mark in July 2017, with both the BSE Sensex and the NSE

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Nifty touching historic highs. In August 2017, markets rights issues) increased by 9.0 per cent during April-
corrected somewhat amidst volatility following the August 2017 over the corresponding period a year ago.
SEBI’s directions to stock exchanges to ban shell Companies mobilised a total of `104.7 billion through
companies, concerns over high valuations, lower than 53 initial public offer (IPO) issues of which 41 were
expected corporate earnings results for Q1 of 2017- listed on the Small and Medium Enterprise (SME)
18, downside risks to growth in 2017-18, uncertainty platform of the BSE and the NSE. Financial entities
over the GST rollout, net selling by foreign portfolio accounted for 32.8 per cent of the total resources
investors and global sell-offs over geopolitical tensions mobilised through public issues of equity. Among
in the Korean peninsula. non-financial entities, the healthcare sector raised the
largest amount of `19.5 billion, accounting for 26.1
Reduction in deposit interest rates by banks and
per cent of the total, followed by engineering (20.1 per
the decline in gold prices enhanced the relative
cent) and consumer service (10.6 per cent) sectors. The
attractiveness of mutual fund schemes. Resources
IPOs in the pipeline suggest that the upbeat primary
mobilised under equity oriented schemes during
market conditions are likely to continue in the short run.
April-August 2017 were higher at `614 billion than
`185 billion during the corresponding period last IV.1.5 Foreign Exchange Market: The rupee traded
year. Mutual funds are emerging as a counterweight
with an appreciating bias against the US dollar,
to foreign institutional investors in the equity
strengthening by around 4 per cent in H1 of 2017-18
market. Net investment by mutual funds in equity
after six consecutive years of depreciation. A weaker
during April-September 2017 was at `752.7 billion as
US dollar and strong inflows drawn in by the resilience
against outflows of `87.7 billion by foreign portfolio
of macro fundamentals, especially the narrowing of
investors. The post-demonetisation shift in the
inflation differentials, also provided sustained upside
composition of financial saving of households into
to the rupee, as in the case of the EME currencies (Chart
financial assets expanded assets under management
IV.13). Expectations of bolder reforms after the State
(AUM) of mutual funds sizably from about `17.5
election results, the narrowing of the current account
trillion at end-March 2017 to a record of `20.6 trillion
deficit in 2016-17 – in its July 2017 External Sector
at end-August 2017 as against assets under custody
Report, the IMF assessed India’s external positions
of FPIs of `30.4 trillion.
as “broadly in line” with medium-term fundamentals
In the primary market, resources mobilised through – and the implementation of the GST combined to
public issues of equity (initial public offers and lend an upside bias to the rupee. Notably, exchange

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Table IV.1: Nominal and Real Effective Exchange
Rates: Trade-based (Base: 2004-05=100)
Item Index: Appreciation (+) /
September Depreciation (-)
29, 2017 (Per cent)
(P)
September March
2017 over 2017
March over
2017 March

36-currency REER 116.0 -0.6 6.3
36-currency NEER 76.1 -0.7 4.8
6-currency REER 130.3 0.1 8.0
6-currency NEER 67.2 -2.7 5.5
`/ US$ (As on September 29, 2017) 65.4 2.2 1.7
P: Provisional.
Note: REER fi gures are based on the Consumer Price Index (Combined).
Source: RBI.
rate volatility declined considerably: the coefficient
of variation4 of the INR/USD exchange rate at 0.6 per stressed advances ratio at 12.6 per cent as on June 30,
cent during the first half of 2017-18 was lowest since 2017 – and capital constraints, particularly in public
2005-06. sector banks, have hindered a robust revival in the
flow of bank credit. The large divergence in credit
In terms of both the 36-currency nominal effective
growth across bank groups is striking, suggesting the
exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange
role of several factors at play from both demand side
rate (REER), the rupee depreciated by 0.7 per cent and
and supply side (Chart IV.16).
0.6 per cent, respectively, between September 2017
and March 2017 (Table IV.1). Currencies of several The adverse impact of stressed assets in the banking
major AEs and EMEs have appreciated against the system is also visible in the sectoral deployment
US dollar since January 2017, largely reflecting the of credit (Chart IV.17). Industry has the largest
weakness of the US dollar, with the US dollar index
depreciating by 8.9 per cent over end-December 2016
(Chart IV.14).
IV.1.6 Credit Market: In the credit market, activity
remained subdued although non-food credit staged a
modest recovery during H1 of 2017-18, after a sharp
deceleration in the preceding six months (Chart
IV.15). A part of the credit slowdown in H2 of 2016-17
was overstated by the swapping of loans into UDAY
bonds and the use of demonetised currency notes for
repaying bank loans. As stated in the MPR of April 2017,
stressed assets – gross NPAs of scheduled commercial
banks (SCBs) at 10.3 per cent of total advances and the
4 The coeffi cient of variation (CV) is a standardised measure of dispersion
of a probability distribution or frequency distribution and can be calculated
as a ratio of standard deviation to the mean.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
share of stressed assets in the banking system and, of 2017-18, however, banks’ non-SLR investment was
correspondingly, credit growth to industry remains lower than in previous years (Chart IV.19).
in contraction mode. Within industry, sectors facing
With the gradual reduction in surplus liquidity in the
acute stress are also experiencing the largest declines
system and the pick-up in credit growth, the level of
in bank credit exposure, reflecting stepped-up efforts
excess maintenance under the Statutory Liquidity
to deleverage and free up balance sheets from
Ratio (SLR) by the banking system declined from
impairment (Chart IV.18).
a high of 11.8 per cent in December 2016 to 9.2 per
Banks also extend finance to the commercial sector of cent by June 2017 (Chart IV.20). The prescribed SLR
the economy by way of non-SLR investments, mainly was reduced by 50 bps to 20.0 per cent of NDTL
in the form of investment in CPs and bonds/shares/ effective the fortnight beginning June 24, 2017,
debentures issued by non-financial corporates. In H1 aimed at freeing up resources of banks for lending

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
to productive sectors of the economy. After the Among domestic non-bank sources, credit extended
reduction in the SLR, however, excess SLR increased by housing finance companies and NBFCs increased
in July to 9.8 per cent and further to 10.3 per cent in (Table IV.2).
August, reflecting banks’ reluctance to lend in the face
Table IV.2: Funding from Non-Bank Sources to
of their asset quality concerns and capital constraints,
Commercial Sector
lacklustre investment demand and stalled progress
(Amount in ` billion)
in unlocking stranded investment. The increase in Item April to August
excess SLR occurred across bank groups, but was the
2016-17 2017-18
sharpest for foreign banks. Private banks, which have
Amount Per Amount Per
the lowest excess SLR among SCBs, also registered a cent of cent of
total total
sharp increase in August to 5.9 per cent of NDTL. High
A. Flow from Non-banks 2,266 100.0 2,575 100.0
excess SLR has enabled banks to comfortably meet the
(A1+A2)
liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) norms, relative to their A1. Domestic Sources 1,802 79.6 1,616 62.8
counterparts in other jurisdictions. 1 Public issues by non-fi nancial 60 2.6 80 3.1
entities
2 Gross private placement by 615 27.2 449 17.4
The total flow of financial resources to the commercial
non-fi nancial entities
sector was much higher during H1 of 2017-18 than in 3 Net issuance of CPs subscribed 720 31.8 148 5.7
by non-banks #
the comparable period of last year5, with both bank
4 Net credit by housing fi nance 332 14.7 510 19.8
and non-bank funding being higher (Chart IV.21). companies $
5 Total accommodation by 4 RBI 4 0.2 -5 -0.2
Among non-bank sources of funding, the increase was
regulated AIFIs
mainly on account of foreign sources, particularly FDI. 6 NBFCs-ND-SI (net of bank 35 1.5 285 11.1
credit) #
7 LIC’s net investment in 36 1.6 148 5.8
corporate debt, infrastructure
5 Financial year variations for banking aggregates are computed over the and social sector
last reporting Friday of the previous fi nancial year. In the case of 2017-18, A2. Foreign Sources 463 20.4 959 37.2
however, the last reporting Friday of the previous year was March 31, 2017,
1 External commercial -204 -9.0 47 1.8
which was also the balance sheet date. The fi nancial year fl ow from the borrowings / FCCB $
banking sector has therefore been computed from the penultimate reporting
2 Foreign direct investment to 667 29.4 912 35.4
Friday of 2016-17. This avoids the impact of year-end balance sheet India $
adjustments for computing the credit fl ows in 2017-18. If credit fl ows are
computed from March 31, 2017, they will typically be negative for almost #: Up to June 2017 $: Up to July 2017.
the entire H1. Sources: RBI, SEBI, NHB and LIC.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Table IV.3: Transmission to Deposit and Lending Rates
(Variation in percentage points)
Period Repo Rate Term Deposit Rates Lending Rates
Median WADTDR Median WALR - WALR - 1-year
Term Base Rate Outstand- Fresh Rupee Median
Deposit ing Rupee Loans MCLR
Rate Loans
Sep. 15, 2017 over Dec. 2014 -2.00 -1.58 -1.95 -0.75 -1.25 -1.93 -1.10
Pre-Demonetisation (Dec. 2014 to Oct. 2016) -1.75 -0.99 -1.26 -0.61 -0.75 -0.97 -0.15
Post-Demonetisation (since Nov. 2016) -0.25 -0.59 -0.69 -0.14 -0.50 -0.96 -0.95
WADTDR: Weighted Average Domestic Term Deposit Rate. WALR: Weighted Average Lending Rate. MCLR: Marginal Cost of Funds Based Lending Rate.
MCLR was introduced on April 1, 2016. Data on Median Term Deposit Rate, WADTDR and WALR on outstanding and fresh rupee loans pertain to August
2017. 1-year Median MCLR data relate to September 15, 2017.
Source: RBI.
IV.2 Monetary Policy Transmission the MCLR) (Chart IV.22). There also appears to have
been divergence in base rate adjustments by banks to
The massive influx of current account and savings
preserve margins on legacy portfolios given their weak
account (CASA) deposits into the banking system
balance sheets. Since December 2014, the median
post-demonetisation brought about an appreciable
base rate of banks has declined by only about 75 bps
reduction in the cost of funds of banks and helped
as against the cumulative decline in the policy repo
strengthen the transmission of monetary policy to
rate by 200 bps, suggesting that faster transmission to
lending rates. While transmission was relatively
the entire loan book after the introduction of MCLR
stronger to deposit rates before demonetisation,
has not materialised. Overall, the transmission of
the transmission to marginal cost of funds based
policy rate cuts of 200 bps since January 2015 to fresh
lending rate (MCLR) gained significant traction post-
rupee loans has been to the tune of 193 bps under
demonetisation (Table IV.3). Across bank groups, the
the MCLR regime. However, the transmission to
spread between weighted average lending rate (WALR)
outstanding rupee loans remained muted at only 125
and MCLR remained higher in respect of outstanding
bps, suggesting that there is further scope for banks to
rupee loans than in the case of fresh rupee loans,
reduce rates on their legacy portfolios.
suggesting that transmission to rates on outstanding
rupee loans was incomplete as they were contracted at a The WALR on outstanding housing loans are closest
relatively higher cost and much of the legacy portfolios to the one year median MCLR as well as the base rate,
is linked to the base rate (which moved slower than suggesting that banks charge lower spreads on such

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
loans. This could be due to lower credit defaults in the Since July 31, 2017, several banks have reduced
sector and also due to competition from non-banks savings bank deposit rates, breaking the “cartelised”
(Charts IV.23 and IV.24). rigidity which had made saving deposit rates highly
insensitive to monetary policy impulses even after
The impact of competition is also evident from the
banks were given full flexibility to set rates in October
greater transmission to large industry, which has
2011. Flexible resetting of saving deposit rates, based
access to alternative sources of funds, including the
on changing market clearing conditions and shifts in
corporate bond market (Chart IV.25). Highly rated
the stance of monetary policy, is important for greater
corporate bond yields, for example, have all along
flexibility in price setting behaviour on the asset side,
remained below the MCLR (Chart IV.26).
given the high share of CASA deposits in total deposits

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
of August 2, 2017, an internal Study Group (Chairman:
Dr. Janak Raj) was constituted by the Reserve Bank to
study various aspects of the MCLR system from the
perspective of improving monetary transmission. The
Study Group, which submitted its report on September
25, 2017, observed that internal benchmarks such
as the base rate/MCLR have not delivered effective
transmission of monetary policy. Arbitrariness in
calculating the base rate/MCLR and spreads charged
over them has undermined the integrity of the
interest rate setting process. The base rate/MCLR
regime is also not in sync with global practices on
pricing of bank loans. The Study Group has, therefore,
recommended a switchover to an external benchmark
in a time-bound manner. (Please see the Report of the
Study Group for further details).
(Chart IV.27). Competition from small savings on IV.3 Liquidity Conditions and the Operating
which the interest rates have generally been higher Procedure of Monetary Policy
than term deposit rates, and which are not adjusted as
The amended RBI Act 1934 requires the Reserve
per the announced formula by the Government, has
Bank to place the operating procedure relating to
also constrained transmission (Table IV.4).
the implementation of monetary policy and changes
The overall experience with the transmission of thereto from time to time, if any, in the public domain.
monetary policy since the switch over to the MCLR The RBI’s approach to managing persistent large
regime from the base rate in April 2016 has not been surplus liquidity in the post-demonetisation period
fully satisfactory. Therefore, as indicated in the using a mix of conventional and unconventional
Statement on Developmental and Regulatory Policies instruments was presented in the Monetary Policy
Table IV.4: Interest Rates on Small Savings Instruments for Q3: 2017-18
(Per cent)
Small Saving Scheme Maturity (years) Spread $ Average G-sec Formula based GoI announced Difference
(Percentage yield (%) of rate of interest rate of interest (Percentage
point) corresponding (%) (applicable (%) (applicable point) not
maturity (Jun to for Oct to Dec for Oct- Dec transmitted
Aug 2017) 2017) 2017)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (3) + (4) (6) (7) = (6) - (5)
Savings Deposit - - - - 4.00 -0.00
Public Provident Fund 15 0.25 6.70 6.95 7.80 0.85
Term Deposits
1 Year 1 0 6.17 6.17 6.80 0.63
2 Year 2 0 6.25 6.25 6.90 0.65
3 Year 3 0 6.32 6.32 7.10 0.78
5 Year 5 0.25 6.48 6.73 7.60 0.87
Post Offi ce Recurring Deposit Account 5 0 6.32 6.32 7.10 0.78
Post Offi ce Monthly Income Scheme 5 0.25 6.44 6.69 7.50 0.81
Kisan Vikas Patra 115 Months 0 6.70 6.70 7.50 0.80
NSC VIII issue 5 0.25 6.63 6.88 7.80 0.92
Senior Citizens Saving Scheme 5 1.00 6.48 7.48 8.30 0.82
Sukanya Samriddhi Account Scheme 21 0.75 6.70 7.45 8.30 0.85
$ Spreads for fixing small saving rates as per GoI Press Release of Feb 2016.
Note: GoI decided to keep interest rates on small saving schemes for Q3:2017-18 unchanged.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Report of April 2017. Anticipating that surplus
liquidity conditions may persist through 2017-18,
the RBI provided forward guidance on liquidity in
April 2017: (a) variable reverse repo auctions with a
preference for longer term tenors to be used as the
key instrument for absorbing the remaining post-
demonetisation liquidity surplus; (b) issuances of
T-Bills and dated securities under the MSS up to `1
trillion; (c) issuances of CMBs of appropriate tenors of
up to `1 trillion in accordance with the memorandum
of understanding (MoU) with the Government of India
to manage enduring surpluses due to government
operations; (d) open market operations with a view
to moving system level liquidity to neutrality; and (e)
fine tuning reverse repo/repo operations to modulate
day-to-day liquidity.
In pursuance of this mandate, the Reserve Bank
auctioned T-Bills (tenors ranging from 312 days to 329
open market operations to absorb `600 billion on a
days) aggregating `1 trillion under the MSS in April
durable basis (`200 billion each in July, August and
and May 2017. Incremental expansion in currency in
September). With the Government’s cash balance
circulation due to rapid remonetisation drained about
position improving during August, the net average
`2 trillion of surplus liquidity during Q1 of 2017-18.
daily absorption of liquidity declined from `5,126
However, this was more than offset by front-loaded
billion (including LAF, MSS and CMBs) in the first
expenditure by the Government and large redemption
week of August to `4,417 billion by end-August 2017.
of Government securities. The average daily absorption
With advance tax outflows in mid-September, the
of liquidity increased to `4,562 billion (including LAF,
government cash balances increased to about `1,322
MSS and CMBs) during Q1 of 2017-18 from `3,141
billion. Consequently, the surplus liquidity in the
billion at end-March 2017 (Chart IV.28).
system declined to `2,771 billion by end-September.
In Q2, frequent recourse to WMAs and ODs by the The combining of conventional and unconventional
Government augmented market liquidity even as instruments into a pro-active liquidity management
currency in circulation absorbed up to `569 billion. In strategy could have been influential in averting
addition to regular 7-day, 14-day and 28-day variable potential risks to inflation, both upside and downside
rate reverse repo auctions, the Reserve Bank conducted (Box IV.2).
Box IV.2: Managing the Post-demonetisation Liquidity Glut: Minimising Risks to Infl ation
A causal relationship running from excess liquidity overnight money market rates aligned to the policy rate
in the banking system to infl ation draws from the internalises the central bank’s balance sheet. In the
Friedmanesque proposition: “infl ation is always and face of inadequate credit demand, there has been an
everywhere a monetary phenomenon”. For modern involuntary build-up of excess reserves in the banking
central banks conducting monetary policy by setting system since November 2016 refl ecting the return of
interest rates consistent with the price stability specifi ed bank notes (SBNs) as deposits with banks. Pro-
objective, monetary expansion is endogenous – the active liquidity management ensured that the WACR
operating procedure that fully accommodates demand did not fall signifi cantly below the LAF fl oor under the
for liquidity (or demand for bank reserves) to keep the pressure of the resulting liquidity glut.
(contd.)

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
The variable that congeals all lead information about In the literature, empirical evidence shows that excess
infl ation is the monetary aggregate (or broad money), liquidity has stoked equity price infl ation (Balatti et al,
not central bank liquidity that only squares the daily 2017). It has also been found, however, that the dynamic
system level mismatch. In fact, even though the net effects of excess liquidity shocks on infl ation and asset
liquidity surplus [as percentage of net demand and prices may depend on the state of the economy, in
time liabilities (NDTL)] in India has been persistently particular, on the state of the business cycle, the credit
high since demonetisation, broad money (M ) and bank
cycle, the starting position in the infl ation and asset

credit growth in the system have remained subdued
price cycles and the monetary policy stance (Baumeister
(Chart IV.B.1). Thus, infl ationary pressure could have
et al, 2008). Drawing on this empirical literature, two
emerged only if, illustratively, banks had leveraged on
vector auto-regression (VAR) models were used with
easing liquidity to expand credit at a rate faster than the
four variables each, taking into account the frequency
growth in nominal GDP, leading to higher demand for
of data availability.
money and stronger growth in broad money. A similar
dynamic appears to be playing out under quantitative While daily data covering the period from July 2010 to
easing. Advanced economies, in fact, experienced July 2017 are used in the fi rst model (daily net LAF as
defl ation risks despite large surpluses of liquidity proportion to banks’ NDTL; daily changes in the spread
sloshing around (Reis, 2016). of the WACR over the effective Fed funds rate, daily
(contd.)

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
changes in the BSE Sensex; and daily net FPI infl ows to increase or interest rates to fall. It is, therefore, not
into equity), monthly data covering the period from surprising that post-demonetisation surplus liquidity
January 2011 to July 2017 are used in the second has not had any impact on infl ation in India so far.
model (monthly change in net LAF as proportion
References
to NDTL; spread of the WACR over the repo rate;
Mirco Balatti, Chris Brooks, Michael P. Clements
annualised m-o-m changes in the headline CPI index;
and Konstantina Kappou (2017), “Did Quantitative
and annualised m-o-m changes in broad money as the
Easing only infl ate stock prices? Macroeconomic
four variables). All variables used in the two models
evidence from the US and UK”, www.efmaefm.
are stationary, and the VAR lag length is determined
org/0EFMAMEETINGS/.../papers/EFMA2017_0227_
by the standard Akaike information criterion/Schwarz
fullpaper.pdf.
information criterion.
Christiane Baumeister, Eveline Durinck, Gert Peersman
Impulse response functions suggest that excess
(2008), “Liquidity, Infl ation and Asset Prices in a
liquidity does not have a statistically signifi cant impact
Time-Varying Framework for the Euro Area”, https://
on the paths of either equity price changes or CPI
www.nottingham.ac.uk/cfcm/documents/workshops/
infl ation (Chart IV.B.2). However, a standard deviation
baumeister-durinck-peersman.pdf
shock to broad money (i.e., an increase) is found to be
Ricardo Reis (2016), “Funding Quantitative Easing to
infl ationary, as expected. This refl ects that when excess
Target Infl ation”, September
liquidity does not lead to higher money growth, it is
not infl ationary. An exogenous shock to liquidity in https://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/fi les/publicat/
the model does not cause either broad money growth sympos/2016/econsymposium-reis-paper.pdf?la=en
With remonetisation, currency in circulation has
steadily moved closer to the pre-demonetisation level
(Chart IV.29), reaching about 88 per cent of the level
(`17.97 trillion) prevailing around the immediate pre-
demonetisation period.
Looking forward, surplus liquidity conditions are
likely to persist in the second half of 2017-18, which
will test the goals and instrumentation of the Reserve
Bank’s liquidity management framework in its resolve
to align the operating target of monetary policy – the
WACR – with the policy repo rate and to enable the
seamless evolution of other rates in the money market
spectrum. Equity and bond markets will likely have
to contend with volatility from investor sentiment
shifts in response to both global and domestic factors.
In the forex market too, the outlook for capital flows
and the likely path of the US dollar would interact public sector banks, and a durable pick-up in private
with domestic fundamentals and the current account investment demand. Ongoing efforts to determine a
deficit to impinge on fair values of the exchange rate suitable external benchmark for bank lending rates
and deviations therefrom. A robust revival in credit should bring greater transparency in due course in the
growth hinges on resolution of stressed assets in the setting of interest rates by banks and help improve
banking system, early and adequate recapitalisation of monetary policy transmission.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
V. External Environment
Global growth has broadened to encompass several advanced and emerging market economies. World trade has also
picked up and is likely to outpace global GDP growth. Inflationary pressures remain subdued across geographies,
supported by soft commodity prices.
Since the MPR of April 2017, global growth has In the Euro area, economic recovery has gained
strengthened, spreading to several AEs and some traction and broadened across constituent economies.
commodity exporting EMEs as well, lifting the latter GDP growth in Q2 improved over and above the
out of recession. Global trade has been buoyed by relatively strong outturn in Q1. Unemployment
gradually fi rming demand, and exports and imports fell consistently, and retail sales rose, lifting both
have risen in several economies. Crude prices have business and consumer sentiment. Strengthening
fi rmed up in Q3 on the easing supply glut. Metal prices external demand and receding political uncertainty in
have rallied, fuelled by resurgent Chinese demand, the region supported the recovery.
but have moderated in recent weeks. Growing risk
In Japan, economic expansion accelerated in Q2 from
appetite for fi nancial assets led to a fall in bullion
its modest pace in the previous fi ve quarters. Domestic
prices to multi-month lows, before a recent rally in
demand – both consumption and investment – rose
September. Infl ation remains below target levels in
to a three-year peak. In spite of a weak currency and
many AEs and subdued across several EMEs.
stronger global demand, net exports turned negative
International fi nancial markets have been buoyed by as imports rose, indicating resilient domestic activity.
these global growth prospects and the accommodative Industrial production accelerated and the labour
monetary policy stance in major AEs. Financial market steadily tightened, even as fi nancial conditions
markets have remained resilient to geo-political events remained highly accommodative (Table V.1).
and more recently to the US Fed’s decision to reduce
the size of its balance sheet. Equity markets rallied in Table V.1: Real GDP Growth (q-o-q, annualised)
most AEs, while some correction has been witnessed (Per cent)
in a few EMEs. Bond yields in major AEs hardened on Country Q2- Q3- Q4- Q1- Q2- 2017 2018
2016 2016 2016 2017 2017 (P) (P)
expectations of monetary policy normalisation, but
Advanced Economies (AEs)
generally declined in EMEs with softening infl ation
Canada -1.4 4.1 2.7 3.7 4.5 2.5 1.9
and neutral or accommodative policy rates. The US
Euro area 1.2 2.0 2.4 2.0 2.4 1.9 1.7
dollar weakened to a multi-month low in September,
Japan 2.0 0.9 1.6 1.2 2.5 1.3 0.6
while the euro rallied further. Movements in EME South Korea 3.6 2.0 2.0 4.4 2.4 2.7 2.8
currencies were mixed but with a general tendency to UK 2.0 1.6 2.4 1.2 1.2 1.7 1.5
US 2.2 2.8 1.8 1.2 3.1 2.1 2.1
appreciate.
Emerging Market Economies (EMEs)
V.1 Global Economic Conditions
Brazil -1.6 -2.3 -1.8 4.1 1.0 0.3 1.3
The US economy expanded at a solid pace in Q2 after China 7.6 7.2 6.8 5.2 6.8 6.7 6.4
Malaysia 4.4 5.6 5.2 7.2 5.2 4.5 4.7
a weak performance in Q1. Buoyant labour market
Mexico 0.4 4.2 2.9 2.6 2.3 1.9 2.0
conditions, upbeat consumer confi dence, softer
Russia* -0.5 -0.4 0.3 0.5 2.5 1.4 1.4
than expected infl ation and a robust housing market South Africa 3.1 0.4 -0.3 -0.6 2.5 1.0 1.2
supported consumer spending. Industrial production Thailand 3.8 2.0 2.1 5.3 5.4 3.0 3.3
showed an upswing, while non-residential investment Memo: 2016E 2017P 2018P
growth made a turnaround. Retail sales and business World Output 3.2 3.5 3.6
World Trade Volume 2.3 4.0 3.9
spending suggest that the growth momentum has been
E : Estimate, P : Projection, *: GDP y-o-y.
sustained in early Q3. However, recent hurricanes
Sources: Bloomberg and IMF.
could temporarily weigh on economic activity.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Among EMEs, some convergence in growth US, Eurozone and China, an ebbing of contractionary
dynamics took place during H1:2017 as the economic forces in Brazil and the rate of expansion slowing in
performance of large commodity exporting economies the UK and Russia. The OECD’s composite leading
and of several middle-income countries picked up. indicators (CLIs) point to prospects of growth gaining
In China, growth regained some lost momentum in momentum in China and Brazil, and stable momentum
Q2, supported by fi scal stimulus and growing global in the US, Euro area and Japan (Chart V.1).
demand. However, investment slowed down as
Growth in global merchandise trade volume accelerated
lending costs rose and the property market cooled
in Q2:2017 from the lacklustre performance in 2016.
off, though manufacturing continued to expand
Recent data suggest that this upturn has been broad-
in spite of tighter fi nancial conditions. China’s
based as countries accounting for more than two-
debt-fuelled growth remains a potential source of
thirds of world trade (Brazil, China, EU, India, Japan
fi nancial instability, triggering a rating downgrade
Russia, and the USA) recorded higher trade activity
by S&P Global Ratings for the fi rst time since 1999.
than a year ago. However, it remains far below its level
The Brazilian economy expanded for two consecutive
in 2010 (Chart V.2a).
quarters in Q2, but growth dynamics remained fragile
due to the depressed labour market and political Services trade registered some deceleration in Q2:2017
uncertainty. The Russian economy emerged out of two in major economies (Chart V2.b), except the US. The
years of recession, supported by the strengthening World Trade Outlook Indicator (WTOI) of the World
global environment and improving macroeconomic Trade Organisation (WTO) points to a modest pick-up
fundamentals. Middle-income Asian economies such in global services trade in Q3:2017. According to the
as Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand improved their WTO, this would crucially depend on the performance
growth performance during H1:2017, riding on stronger of travel, fi nancial and business services, though the
demand at home and from abroad. Growth in South
recovery in merchandise trade could also provide some
Korea, which has risen markedly in Q1, decelerated
impetus. Multilateral organisations, viz., the IMF, the
in Q2 due to a sharp fall in Chinese tourism following
World Bank and the WTO project global trade volume
a heightening of geopolitical tensions. South Africa
rising in 2017 and 2018. However, major economies
exited recession in Q2, however, it continues to face
could face a tough policy environment with the
economic and political challenges.
imposition of Section 301 of US trade law that allows
Composite purchasing managers’ indices (PMI) unilateral imposition of tariffs which, in turn, could
indicate economic growth gaining momentum in the attract geopolitical and retaliatory repercussions.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
V.2 Commodity Prices and Global Infl ation gasoline production, the slowdown in localised
refi nery activity did cause supply disruptions for a
Global commodity prices were affected by demand
short duration.
and supply imbalances, geopolitical tensions and
commodity-specifi c factors, including weather
Base metal prices rose by 10.1 per cent during April
conditions in respect of agricultural commodities.
to September 2017, led by copper, zinc, nickel,
Commodity prices measured by the Bloomberg
aluminium and tin, while prices of iron declined.
commodity index declined by 1.0 per cent during
Metal prices, particularly of copper, have rallied
April to September 2017, despite some pick-up in late
since mid-July, driven by increased demand from
June-July on the upsurge in Chinese demand. Crude
China where production itself was disrupted as a
oil prices declined by over 8.0 percent in Q2:2017
fallout of environmental inspections, however, some
on account of high inventories, though supply cuts
moderation was witnessed in recent weeks.
agreed by the OPEC led to some fi rming up in May.
In late Q3, Brent crude prices hit a two-year high in Gold and silver prices fell by about 1 per cent and 9
September due to OPEC cuts, declining US crude oil per cent, respectively, during Q2:2017 on increased
inventories, adverse climatic conditions and geo- risk appetite that reduced safe haven demand and
political concerns (Chart V.3). Although the recent also due to the weaker US dollar. During Q3:2017,
hurricanes in the US have not impacted crude and precious metal prices, particularly of gold, have

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
shown some recovery, hitting a 12-month high as Infl ationary pressures in EMEs continued to be
tensions sparked between the US and North Korea. divergent (Chart V.5b). In China, infl ation inched up
in Q2 following a signifi cant fall in Q1 and touched a
The Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO)’s food
seven-month high in September on account of strong
price index grew by over 2 per cent during Q2:2017,
domestic demand and increase in the prices of non-
driven predominantly by dairy and meat prices. In
food items. In Russia, infl ation fell for the fi rst time
contrast, edible oil and sugar price indices declined
below the target of 4 per cent in July, while in Brazil,
beginning January 2017. Cereal and sugar prices have
it touched the lower band of the target of 3 per cent
started fi rming up from July (Chart V.4).
in June. In South Africa, infl ation eased during 2017,
Soft commodity prices have kept infl ation expectations
primarily due to falling food infl ation.
quiescent in most AEs, even as economic activity and
job creation have strengthened. Infl ation in the US By contrast, Turkey has continued to face double digit
has remained well below the target in 2017. Euro area infl ation since February 2017, driven by high food,
infl ation has remained below the target due to still transport and housing prices. Infl ation in Indonesia
persisting slack in the labour market, despite the sharp surpassed the target of 4 per cent in Q2 on upward
increase in energy prices in August. In Japan, infl ation revisions in administered electricity prices and
continued to be low at less than 0.5 per cent, though festival-related hikes in food prices; however price
defl ationary fears have disappeared (Chart V.5a). pressures have moderated recently.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
V.3 Monetary Policy Stance support economic recovery, as infl ation continued to
decline.
The monetary policy stance has remained
accommodative globally, though systemic central Although China has kept key policy rates unchanged
banks are increasingly communicating an intent since October 2015 to control excessive debt
towards policy normalisation. In AEs, the US Fed fi nancing, liquidity in the system has been tightened
and Bank of Canada raised policy rates. The US has through measures such as open market operations.
announced balance sheet normalisation beginning Chile has kept the policy rate unchanged since
October 2017. Sustained economic expansion and the rate cut effected in May to support economic
job gains have prompted the US Fed to raise policy activity. Indonesia cut its policy rate twice in Q3
rates four times in eighteen months, the last being of 2017 on falling infl ation and lower current
in June. In its September policy meeting, the ECB account defi cit. Turkey left its tight monetary policy
kept its policy stance unchanged as infl ation remains stance unchanged as infl ation remained elevated.
subdued and reaffi rmed continuance of its ultra-easy By contrast, Mexico raised the policy rate in
policy stance. Similarly, the Bank of England kept tandem with the US, given close economic linkages
its policy rate unchanged in August, but sounded (Chart V.6b).
hawkish as infl ation remained above the target due V.4 Global Financial Markets
to a weak currency. The Bank of Japan, however, has
Changing expectations about the course of monetary
continued with its ultra-accommodative stance as
policy in AEs and improving economic prospects
infl ation has remained low with growth still modest
infl uenced risk perceptions of investors and drove
(Chart V.6a).
global fi nancial markets. Although markets have
Even though monetary policy stances remained remained relatively calm and stable, the unwinding of
diverse in EMEs, several of them either reduced policy the expansion in Fed’s balance sheet since the global
rates or kept them unchanged. In Brazil, the policy fi nancial crisis is a potential vortex of tension going
rate was cut for the sixth time in a row in 2017 so far, forward. With its massive holdings of government and
as the infl ationary situation improved and remained mortgage-backed securities (MBS), the Fed is the most
resilient to political uncertainty, while the currency dominant player in the US bond market. Furthermore,
strengthened. South Africa cut its policy rate for the a reduction of the Fed’s balance sheet would echo
fi rst time in fi ve years in July as the economy slipped growing confi dence in the US economy. In turn, this
into recession in Q1 while infl ation pressures eased. has some implications for fi nancial markets in EMEs
Russia cut its policy rate four times in 2017 so far, to (Box V.1).

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Box V.1: Implications of Unwinding of US Fed Balance Sheet
Three rounds of quantitative easing (QE) in the of capital infl ows during QE, Patra et al., (2016) found
aftermath of the global fi nancial crisis swelled the that capital outfl ows could primarily take place through
Fed’s balance sheet from US$ 0.7 trillion in 2008 to the portfolio rebalancing channel (about 35 per cent of
the current level of US$ 4.2 trillion, consisting of infl ow during QE), followed by the liquidity channel1.
government securities of around US$ 2.0 trillion, A hypothetical exercise assuming Fed balance sheet
mortgage backed securities (MBS) of US$ 1.7 trillion reduction by about one-third to one-half and impacts
and other assets. This has had large spillover effects that are symmetric to that of QE estimated in Bhattarai
on EMEs through capital fl ows, though they remained et al., (2015) in a Bayesian vector autoregression (BVAR)
smaller in countries with better fundamentals (Chen et framework indicates the following: (i) in the US, bond
al., 2014). With the strengthening of economic growth yields could harden in the range of 40-60 bps, while the
in the US, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) exchange rate could appreciate by about 1-3 per cent
indicated a state-contingent unwinding of the balance and equity prices could fall by about 4-6 per cent; and
sheet in June 2017 and outlined the broad principle: (ii) spillovers to fi nancial markets in EMEs (including
India) could result in bond yields fi rming up by 12-18
government securities and MBS would be allowed to
bps, the effective exchange rate depreciating by 0.3-1.0
roll off without reinvesting in a graduated manner,
per cent and equity prices falling by 2.7-5.3 per cent.
which would translate to an annual average reduction
of about US$ 270 billion in government securities An event study based on 20 minutes interval data
and US$ 180 billion in MBS over the next two years. for a two-day window on September 20, 2017 was
In its meeting held on September 20, 2017, the FOMC conducted to gauge the market reaction to the FOMC
announced that it would initiate the balance sheet announcement of Fed balance sheet normalisation
normalisation programme from October 2017. in fi ve select economies, viz., Brazil, India, Indonesia,
South Africa and Turkey. Financial market volatility, as
A reversal of QE may involve standard channels of
measured by the coeffi cient of variation2 (CV), in various
transmission. First, long-term bond yields could
market segments, viz., bond, currency and equity
increase due to a rise in the term premium induced
markets in the US and other fi ve economies, increased
by higher supply for bonds, leading to steepening of
generally. The immediate effect of the announcement
the yield curve. The rise in bond yields, along with
was more pronounced on the bond market in the
tightening of fi nancial conditions, would lead to US, especially for the short tenor securities, while
portfolio rebalancing from equity and risky assets to the impact on bond markets in other countries was
bonds. Second, a combination of portfolio substitution, muted (Chart V.B.1). In currency markets, the impact
risk aversion and safe haven demand could cause fell largely on the Turkish lira and the South African
a rise in bond yields in the US which could, in turn, rand. The Indian rupee was also impacted to some
induce large capital outfl ows from EMEs – the larger extent. The impact on other currencies was muted. No
the external defi cit and debt of a country, the higher signifi cant impact was felt on equity markets.
could be capital outfl ows and the resultant currency
The volatility triggered by the FOMC statement in
depreciation vis-à-vis the US dollar.
EMEs was mixed (Chart V.B.2). While volatility in bond
markets remained higher on the post-announcement
Third, consequent upon reallocation of funds by
day in Brazil, South Africa and Turkey, it declined in
investors towards AEs, fi nancial conditions in EMEs
Indonesia. In currency markets, volatility increased in
could tighten. Lower asset prices and increased
cost of borrowing could adversely affect balance (contd.)
sheets of corporates and banks in these countries,
1 The liquidity channel of QE transmission refers to the higher availability
potentially causing rollover problems on debt issued
of reserves that brings about a decline in liquidity premium, a reduction
in international markets. Fourth, the exchange rate in borrowing costs and an increase in lending by hitherto credit-constrained
lenders.
regime would play an important role in the spillover
2 The coeffi cient of variation (CV) is a standardised measure of dispersion
to the real economy and domestic fi nancial markets.
of a probability distribution or frequency distribution and can be calculated
In the case of India, assuming a symmetric reversal as a ratio of standard deviation to the mean.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
all other countries, barring Turkey, and especially for than the pre-announcement day for all other countries,
India. In equity markets, volatility remained higher barring Brazil.
References:
Bhattarai, Saroj, Arpita Chatterjee, and Woong Yong Park (2015), “Effects of US Quantitative Easing on Emerging
Market Economies”, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Working Paper No. 255.
Chen, Jiaqian, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, and Ratna Sahay (2014), “Spillovers from United States Monetary Policy
on Emerging Markets: Different This Time”? IMF Working Paper WP/14/240.
Patra M. D., J. K. Khundrakpam, S. Gangadaran, R. Kavediya and J. M. Anthony (2016), “Responding to QE Taper
from the Receiving End”, Macroeconomics and Finance in Emerging Market Economies, 9:2, 167-189.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
Meanwhile, sovereign bond yields in many AEs gained the most. Bank share prices have also gained
rose in recent months, although they remain low by on the back of the rise in long-term government
historical standards, given the still low policy rates bond yields, which has raised the prospects of banks’
and term premia suppressed by large assets holdings interest earnings. In the US, the Fed’s favourable
of central banks. Furthermore, in the US, yields are stress test results further boosted share prices
still trading lower than at the beginning of 2017, as of banks. Similarly, in the Euro area, bank share
infl ation has undershot expectations. In the Euro prices were helped by national reform programmes
area, the benchmark 10-year German bond yield rose undertaken by the European Commission. In Japan,
to a peak level in June as markets began to anticipate a rally in share prices during 2017 was driven by
the possibility of reversal in monetary easing by the stronger economic performance and higher corporate
ECB. In the UK, a higher future policy path combined earnings, partly due to a weaker currency and a lower
corporate tax. Equity prices in EMEs gained even
with an infl ation rate above target led to a rise in bond
more on the positive outlook on economic growth.
yields. In Japan, however, bond yields remained close
The gain has been particularly notable for emerging
to zero under the active yield control policy of the
Asia, largely driven by equity prices of IT fi rms
Bank of Japan (Chart V.7a).
(Chart V.7b).
In emerging markets, falling infl ation and generally
Currency markets were driven by expectations that
unchanged policy rates led to a fall in yields of local
monetary policy in some AEs would become less
currency denominated bonds. Improvement in
accommodative. However, the US dollar continued to
economic prospects also led to a softening in bond
depreciate against several currencies since Q1:2017,
yields in EMEs as risk premia declined and induced
despite the raising of the policy rate by the Fed in June
capital infl ows into bond markets.
(Chart V.8a). On the other hand, the euro appreciated
Equity prices have risen signifi cantly across economies signifi cantly against the US dollar and the Japanese
due to a combination of better global economic yen, driven by a change in the forward guidance of
prospects, higher corporate earnings and increased the ECB on reviving economic conditions and marked
risk appetite of investors. The Morgan Stanley reduction in political uncertainty. The Japanese yen
Capital International (MSCI) World Index, which has continued to fl uctuate against the US dollar, but
measures global equity prices, increased by 8.5 per with a depreciating bias, driven by movements in
cent between April and September 2017. Across the 10-year government bond yield differentials between
world, information technology (IT) share prices have these two countries.

MONETARY POLICY REPORT OCTOBER 2017
In EMEs, currency movements against the US dollar remained weak); and easing of border tensions
have been mixed, with country-specifi c factors playing (Mexico).
a signifi cant role (Chart V.8b). The Russian ruble, which
In sum, a cyclical global economic recovery has gained
strengthened in Q1, depreciated in Q2 due to falling
some momentum which could likely be sustained in
crude oil prices. The Brazilian real depreciated sharply
2017. While economic growth has fi rmed up in some
in Q2 and shed all the gains during Q1, following
major AEs, it is also showing a turnaround in EMEs.
domestic political developments, but recouped in Q3. Although infl ation pressures remain contained, the
Most other EME currencies appreciated against the recent uptick in commodity prices pose an upside risk.
US dollar on surges of capital infl ows driven by varied The monetary policy stance will likely shift towards
factors such as stronger macroeconomic fundamentals normalisation in major AEs and will be a critical factor
(China, Thailand and emerging European economies); in shaping the behaviour of global fi nancial markets
search for yields (South Africa where fundamentals with concomitant implications for EMEs.