Published under Section 45ZM of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
Monetary Policy Report
OCTOBER 2020
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai
Contents
Chapter I: Macroeconomic Outlook 1
I.1 : Key Developments since the April 2020 MPR 1
I.2 : The Outlook for Inflation 4
I.3 : The Outlook for Growth 7
I.4 : Balance of Risks 9
I.5 : Conclusion 11
Box I.1: What will the Post-COVID Growth-Inflation Trajectory Look Like? 6
Illustrative Simulations from the Quarterly Projection Model
Chapter II: Prices and Costs 13
II.1 : Base Effect and Momentum 14
II.2 : Drivers of Inflation 15
II.3 : Costs 25
II.4 : Conclusion 27
Box: II.1: Whose Inflation is It? Rural-Urban Divide 22
Chapter III: Demand and Output 28
III.1 : Aggregate Demand 28
III.2 : Aggregate Supply 41
III.3 : Conclusion 48
Box III.1: Real Time Economic Activity Index 31
Chapter IV: Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions 49
IV.1 : Domestic Financial Markets 49
IV.2 : Monetary Policy Transmission 65
IV.3 : Liquidity Conditions and the Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy 68
IV.4 : Conclusion 73
Box IV.1: Unconventional Monetary Policy Measures: Impact on Bond Market 57
Box IV.2: Measures Augmenting Liquidity and Fostering Orderly Market Conditions 69
Chapter V: External Environment 74
V.1 : Global Economic Conditions 74
V.2 : Commodity Prices and Inflation 80
V.3 : Monetary Policy Stance 83
V.4 : Global Financial Markets 86
V.5 : Conclusion 88
Box V.1: Global Value Chains: Regaining Foothold 78
i
ABBREVIATIONS
ADB - Asian Development Bank CP - Commercial Paper
AEs - Advanced Economies CPI - Consumer Price Index
AR - Autoregressive CPI-AL - Consumer Price Index for
Agricultural Labourers
ARCH - Autoregressive Conditional
Heteroskedasticity CPI-C - Consumer Price Index - Combined
BE - Budget Estimates CPI-IW - Consumer Price Index for Industrial
Workers
BEI - Business Expectations Index
CPI-RL - Consumer Price Index for Rural
BG - Breusch-Godfrey
Labourers
BIS - Bank for International Settlements
CRR - Cash Reserve Ratio
BoC - Bank of Canada
CSF - Consolidated Sinking Fund
BoE - Bank of England
CU - Capacity Utilisation
BoJ - Bank of Japan
CU (SA) - Capacity Utilisation (Seasonally
bps - Basis Points Adjusted)
BRICS - Brazil, Russia, India, China and DA - Dearness Allowance
South Africa
DAP - Di-Ammonium Phosphate
BSE - Bombay Stock Exchange
DFM - Dynamic Factor Model
CAB - Current Account Balance
DGCA - Directorate General of Civil Aviation
CACP - Commission for Agricultural Costs
DGCI&S - Directorate General of Commercial
and Prices
Intelligence and Statistics
CAG - Comptroller and Auditor General of ECB - European Central Bank
India
ECBs - External Commercial Borrowings
CCIL - Clearing Corporation of India
EMEs - Emerging Market Economies
Limited
EU - European Union
CD - Certificate of Deposit
EXIM - Export-Import Bank of India
CDS - Credit Default Swap
FAO - Food and Agriculture Organization
CI - Confidence Interval
FBIL - Financial Benchmarks India Pvt Ltd
CiC - Currency in Circulation
FDI - Foreign Direct Investment
CII - Confederation of Indian Industry
FICCI - Federation of Indian Chambers of
CIs - Coincident Indices
Commerce and Industry
CLI - Composite Leading Indicator
FIMA - Foreign and International Monetary
COVID-19 - Coronavirus Disease 2019 Authorities
iiiiii
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
FIMMDA - Fixed Income Money Market and Ind-AS - Indian Accounting Standard
Derivatives Association of India
INR - Indian Rupee
FIs - Financial Institutions
IO - Input-output
FMOLS - Fully Modified Ordinary Least
IOCL - Indian Oil Corporation Limited
Squares
IRFCL - International Reserves and Foreign
FOMC - Federal Open Market Committee
Currency Liquidity
FPI - Foreign Portfolio Investment
ISM - Institute for Supply Management
FR - Full Reservoir Level
IT - Information Technology
FRE - First Revised Estimates
LAF - Liquidity Adjustment Facility
F-TRAC - FIMMDA Trade Reporting and
LM - Lagrange multiplier
Confirmation System
LPA - Long Period Average
GDP - Gross Domestic Product
LPG - Liquefied Petroleum Gas
GFCE - Government Final Consumption
LPR - Loan Prime Rate
Expenditure
LTRO - Long Term Repo Operation
GFCF - Gross Fixed Capital Formation
MCLR - Marginal Cost of Funds Based
GFD - Gross Fiscal Deficit
Lending Rate
GNDI - Gross National Disposable Income
MFI - Micro Finance Institution
GoI - Government of India
MF - Mutual Funds
GSDP - Gross State Domestic Product
MGNREGA - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
G-Secs - Government Securities Employment Guarantee Act
GST - Goods and Services Tax MMRP - Modified Mixed Reference Period
GVA - Gross Value Added MOAFW - Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare
GVC - Global Value Chain
m-o-m - Month-on-Month
H1 - First Half of the Year
(April-September) MoRTH - Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways
H2 - Second Half of the Year
(October-March) MPC - Monetary Policy Committee
HFCs - Housing Finance Companies MPR - Monetary Policy Report
HTM - Held to Maturity MSCI - Morgan Stanley Capital International
IEA - Index of Economic Activity MSF - Marginal Standing Facility
IIP - Index of Industrial Production MSME - Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
IMF - International Monetary Fund MSP - Minimum Support Price
iivv
Abbreviations
NABARD - National Bank for Agriculture and PDS - Public Distribution System
Rural Development
PE - Provisional Estimates
NBER - National Bureau of Economic
PELTRO - Pandemic Emergency Longer-Term
Research
Refinancing Operation
NBFCs - Non-Banking Financial Companies
PEPP - Pandemic Emergency Purchase
NCAER - National Council of Applied Programme
Economic Research
PFCE - Private Final Consumption
NDS - Negotiated Dealing System Expenditure
NDS-OM - Negotiated Dealing System-Order PM - Prime Minister
Matching
PMI - Purchasing Managers’ Index
NDTL - Net Demand and Time Liabilities
POL - Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants
NEER - Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
PPAC - Petroleum Planning & Analysis Cell
NHB - National Housing Bank
PSU - Public Sector Undertaking
NIM - Net Interest Margin
Q1 - First Quarter
NIP - National Infrastructure Pipeline
Q2 - Second Quarter
NPA - Non-Performing Asset
Q3 - Third Quarter
NSC - National Savings Certificate
Q4 - Fourth Quarter
NSDL - National Securities Depository
q-o-q - Quarter-on-Quarter
Limited
QPM - Quarterly Projection Model
NSO - National Statistical Office
RBA - Reserve Bank of Australia
NSSO - National Sample Survey Office
RBI - Reserve Bank of India
OD - Overdraft
RBNZ - Reserve Bank of New Zealand
OECD - Organization for Economic
RD - Revenue Deficit
Cooperation and Development
RE - Revised Estimates
OMCs - Oil Marketing Companies
REER - Real Effective Exchange Rate
OMO - Open Market Operation
RHS - Right Hand Side
OPEC - Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries SAAR - Seasonally Adjusted Annualised Rate
OTC - Over-the-Counter SAE - Second Advanced Estimates
PADO - Public Administration, Defence and SCB - Scheduled Commercial Bank
Other services
SDL - State Development Loan
PBoC - People’s Bank of China
SEBI - Securities and Exchange Board of
PCE - Personal Consumption Expenditure India
vv
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
SEK - Swedish Krona VAR - Vector Autoregression
SIAM - Society of Indian Automobile VAT - Value Added Tax
Manufacturers
WAC - Weighted Average Coupon
SIDBI - Small Industries Development Bank
WACR - Weighted Average Call Money Rate
of India
WADR - Weighted Average Discount Rate
SLF - Special Liquidity Facility
WADTDR - Weighted Average Domestic Term
SLR - Statutory Liquidity Ratio
Deposit Rate
SPD - Standalone Primary Dealer
WALR - Weighted Average Lending Rate
SPV - Special Purpose Vehicle
WEO - World Economic Outlook
T-Bill - Treasury Bill
WHO - World Health Organization
TLTRO - Targeted Long-Term Repo Operation
WMA - Ways and Means Advance
TSP - Triple Superphosphate
WPI - Wholesale Price Index
UK - United Kingdom
WTI - West Texas Intermediate
UNCTAD - United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development WTO - World Trade Organization
US - United States y-o-y - Year-on-Year
US$ - US Dollar YTD - Year to Date
vvii
I. Macroeconomic Outlook
The global economy plunged into its deepest contraction in living memory in April-June 2020 as COVID-19 took
its toll. In India, real GDP fell by a record low. Supply bottlenecks and higher taxes pushed inflation above the
upper tolerance band of the target. Downside risks from a delayed vaccine, persistence of supply bottlenecks, volatile
international financial markets and high food inflation acquiring a structural character are clear and present
dangers to the macroeconomic outlook.
1.1 Key Developments Since the April 2020 MPR in demand and production cuts, before softening
in September on concerns arising out of the surge
The COVID-19 pandemic has fundamentally altered
in new infections. Gold prices remained elevated as
the setting and conduct of monetary policy across the
heightened uncertainty continues to boost its safe
world. With the global economy having plunged into
haven appeal. Inflation, too, has rebounded, although
its deepest contraction in living memory in Q2:2020,
it remains well below targets in advanced economies
with over 3.5 crore infections, including 10.4 lakh
(AEs), but has risen more strongly on food prices in
confirmed deaths as on October 7, 2020, with massive
some emerging market economies (EMEs).
supply disruptions and demand destruction from
employment and income losses on a scale not seen The efficacy of these actions in reconstructing
before, the unconventional has become conventional economic activity from the ravages of COVID-19
in the ethos of monetary policy making. Central banks is yet to gain traction on a broad scale. In several
have gone where they have feared to tread before: economies, rebounds from troughs have begun in
below the so-called zero lower bound on interest Q3, but the resurgence of infections and the lingering
rates; to the outer limits of quantitative and credit risk of a second wave in the absence of the elusive
easing and beyond. They have undertaken what even vaccine overshadows these early signs of revival, and
until recently they considered as the commission of
contractions persist in several sectors. The balance
original sins – the monetisation of fiscal deficits and
of risks remains slanted to the downside. The next
the management of yield curves.
few quarters can be challenging. Global public debt is
Central bank communication has also turned a radical projected by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) at
corner. Ultra-accommodative stances and more policy over 100 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in
actions to fight the pandemic have been assured into 2020. The G20 has supported time-bound suspension
the foreseeable future, even at the cost of volatility of the debt service obligations of the poorest countries.
in financial markets shaken by this resolve, and Model-based projections suggest that it could take
untoward currency movements. This unprecedented several years for output and activity to recover to
monetary policy activism appears to have put equally pre-pandemic levels in view of the lasting impact on
unprecedented fiscal stimuli in the shade. potential output from the loss of human and physical
capital.
In the event, their combined impulses have eased
financial conditions substantially, helped buoy up In India, with the second highest caseload in the world
global financial markets, and have driven up asset – over 67 lakh infections including 1 lakh deaths as
and commodity prices to a point widely regarded of October 7, 2020, the highest daily infections, the
as a disconnect with the real economy. Crude oil severest lockdown in the world during April-May, and
prices have recovered since May on a gradual rise re-clamping of containment measures and localised

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
lockdowns thereafter as infections surged into the growth for 2020-21 was expected to be negative.
interior, real GDP fell by a record 23.9 per cent year- In these conditions, the recovery of the economy
on-year (y-o-y) in Q1:2020-21 (April-June 2020). Private assumed primacy, but the MPC noted that the headline
consumption and investment slumped precipitously, CPI prints of April-May 2020 required more clarity as
only partly cushioned by government spending. On the National Statistical Office (NSO) had to resort to
the supply side, industry as well as services sectors imputations for many items as data collection was
recorded deep contractions, and only agriculture affected by the lockdowns. Given the uncertainty
exhibited resilience. Meanwhile, supply bottlenecks surrounding the inflation outlook and taking into
exacerbated by social distancing and higher taxes consideration the extremely weak state of the economy
in the midst of the unprecedented shock from the
pushed up inflation sharply, with pressures evident in
pandemic, the MPC decided unanimously that it was
prices of both food and non-food items. At 6.7 per cent
prudent to pause and remain watchful for a durable
in August, consumer price index (CPI) inflation was
reduction in inflation to use the available space to
ruling above the upper tolerance band of the inflation
support the revival of the economy. All members also
target, posing testing challenges for the conduct of
voted to continue with the accommodative stance as
monetary policy, going forward.
long as necessary to revive growth and mitigate the
Monetary Policy Committee: April-September 2020
impact of COVID-19 on the economy, while ensuring
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) met off-cycle that inflation remains within the target going forward.
on May 20-22, 2020 advancing its scheduled meeting
The MPC’s voting pattern reflects the diversity in
in view of the exigencies imposed by COVID-19.
individual members’ assessments, expectations and
The MPC noted that various sectors of the economy
policy preferences, a feature that is also reflected in
were experiencing more acute stress than initially voting patterns of other central banks (Table I.1).
anticipated and financial conditions needed further
easing to prevent the deep distress in the economy, Table I.1 Monetary Policy Committees and
Voting Patterns
especially among the vulnerable and disadvantaged.
While the inflation outlook remained uncertain, the Country Policy Meetings: April - September 2020
forecast of a normal monsoon, subdued international Total Meetings with Meetings without
Meetings Full Consensus Full Consensus
commodity prices, deficient demand and favourable
Brazil 4 4 0
base effects offered some policy space. Against this
Chile 4 4 0
backdrop, the MPC decided to cut the policy repo rate
Colombia 6 3 3
by 40 basis points (bps) to 4.0 per cent (5 members
Czech Republic 4 3 1
voted for a reduction of 40 bps while one member
Hungary 6 6 0
voted for a reduction of 25 bps) on top of the sizeable India 2 1 1
cut of 75 bps in its March 27 off-cycle meeting. Israel 4 0 4
Japan 5 0 5
Inflation surprised on the upside in the run up to the
South Africa 4 1 3
August 2020 meeting of the MPC. The persistence of Sweden 3 3 0
supply chain disruptions and broad-based cost-push Thailand 4 3 1
UK 4 4 0
pressures were seen as keeping inflation elevated in
US 4 4 0
Q2:2020-21 with some moderation only in H2:2020-
Source: Central bank websites.
21, aided by large favourable base effects. Real GDP

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Macroeconomic Outlook
Table I.2: Baseline Assumptions for Projections
Chapters II and III analyse macroeconomic
Indicator MPR April 2020 MPR October 2020
developments during H1:2020-21 (April-September).
Crude Oil (Indian US$ 35 per barrel US$ 40.9 per barrel
For the projections set out in this Chapter, the evolution basket) during 2020-21 during 2020-21
of key macroeconomic and financial variables over the
Exchange rate ` 75/US$ ` 73.6/US$
past six months warrants revisions in the baseline
Monsoon Normal for 2020 9 per cent above long
assumptions made in the April 2020 MPR (Table I.2). period average
First, global crude prices have remained volatile on Global growth Contraction in 2020 -4.9 per cent in 2020
5.4 per cent in 2021
COVID-19-related uncertainty. An unprecedented
Fiscal deficit To remain within BE Given the Covid-19 impact
spike occurred on April 20 when, for the first time ever, (per cent of GDP) 2020-21 on activity, revenues
Centre: 3.5 and expenditures and
West Texas Intermediate (WTI) front month prices
Combined: 6.1 factoring in the additional
turned negative (US$ (-) 37.6 per barrel). Supported borrowings announced,
fiscal deficits are expected
by the agreement between the Organization of the to be significantly higher
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and non-OPEC
Domestic No major change No major change
macroeconomic/
partners (OPEC plus) in April 2020 to cut oil production
structural policies
by a record 9.7 million barrels a day, Brent prices during the forecast
period
recovered from US$ 19 per barrel in April to around
Notes: 1. The Indian basket of crude oil represents a derived numeraire
US$ 45 in August, before softening in September
comprising sour grade (Oman and Dubai average) and sweet
(Chart I.1). Considering these developments, crude grade (Brent) crude oil.
2. The exchange rate path assumed here is for the purpose of
prices (Indian basket) are assumed at US$ 40.9 in the generating the baseline projections and does not indicate any
‘view’ on the level of the exchange rate. The Reserve Bank is
baseline, 17 per cent above the April MPR baseline. guided by the objective of containing excess volatility in the
foreign exchange market and not by any specific level of and/or
Second, the nominal exchange rate (the Indian rupee band around the exchange rate.
3. BE: Budget estimates.
or INR vis-à-vis the US dollar) has moved in both 4. Combined fiscal deficit refers to that of the Centre and States
taken together.
directions since April 2020. The INR remained under Sources: RBI estimates; Budget documents; and IMF.
Chart I.1: Crude Oil: Demand-Supply Balance and Prices
a: Crude Oil: Global Demand and Supply b: Brent Prices
Source: International Energy Agency. Source: Bloomberg.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
depreciating pressures in April due to the generalised in infections in some AEs and EMEs. The IMF expects
flight out of EMEs to the safety of the US dollar the global economy to contract by 4.9 per cent in 2020
amidst COVID-related concerns. After being largely (Chart I.2), while the World Bank and the OECD have
range-bound during May-July, the INR exhibited an projected a decline of 5.2 per cent and 4.5 per cent,
appreciating bias in August. This was driven by the respectively.
surge in portfolio inflows to India on expectations of
I.2 The Outlook for Inflation
highly accommodative monetary policies in advanced
Headline CPI inflation breached the upper tolerance
economies continuing for longer, and improving
band of the target during June-August 2020, propelled
prospects of potential vaccines for COVID-19. In the
by a broad-based propagation of strong upside
light of these developments, the exchange rate is
pressures (Chapter II). Supply chain disruptions
assumed at INR 73.6 per US dollar in the baseline.
and higher taxes on petroleum products and other
Third, global economic activity has underperformed
items imparted these upward pressures on inflation
significantly relative to the April outlook. Global
in spite of muted demand conditions. Data-related
merchandise trade volumes fell by 14.3 per cent in
uncertainties, as complete coverage of markets and
Q2:2020 and the World Trade Organization’s Goods
quotes was disrupted by lockdowns, complicate the
Trade Barometer points to only partial upticks in Q3.
assessment of the outlook.
The global composite Purchasing Managers’ Index
Looking ahead, three months ahead median inflation
(PMI) moved into expansion zone in July-September
expectations of urban households fell by 10 bps in the
after remaining in contraction for five months, but the
September 2020 round of the Reserve Bank’s survey
outlook remains uncertain in view of the resurgence
while one year ahead median inflation expectations
remained unchanged.1 The proportion of respondents
Chart I.2: Global GDP Growth expecting the general price level to increase by more
than the current rate rose for both horizons vis-à-vis
the previous round (Chart I.3). According to the Reserve
Bank’s consumer confidence survey for September
2020, one year ahead inflation expectations remained
at elevated level.
Manufacturing firms polled in the July-September
2020 round of the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook
survey expected selling prices to remain unchanged in
Q3:2020-21 on the back of benign input cost pressures
(Chart I.4).2 The PMI for the manufacturing sector
reported higher input prices in September though
the rate of cost inflation softened from August 2020;
output prices broadly stabilised in September after
Source: IMF.
falling for five months in a row. Services sector firms
1 The Reserve Bank’s inflation expectations survey of households is conducted in 18 cities and the results of the September 2020 survey are based on
responses from 5,652 households.
2 The results of the July-September 2020 round of the industrial outlook survey are based on responses from 959 companies.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Chart I.3: Inflation Expectations of Households Chart I.5: Inflation Expectations of
Professional Forecasters
12 70



9 50






4 20
Source: Inflation Expectations Survey of Households, RBI. Sources: Survey of Professional Forecasters, RBI and National Statistical Office.
also reported higher input costs due to fuel, meat and A bumper rabi crop, moderate increases in minimum
vegetables and some increase in output prices. support prices (MSPs) for kharif crops, a normal
monsoon, sizeable buffer stocks and good water
Professional forecasters surveyed by the Reserve Bank
storage levels in major reservoirs augur well for the
in September 2020 expected CPI inflation to moderate
inflation outlook. At the same time, the persistence
from 6.7 per cent in August 2020 to 4.2 per cent in
of COVID-related supply bottlenecks, higher taxes
Q4:2020-21 and 3.8 per cent in Q2:2021-22 (Chart I.5).3
and their cost-push implications could impart upward
Chart I.4: Expectations about Cost of Raw pressures on inflation. The inflation outlook will
Materials and Selling Prices
also depend on trade policies and effective supply
management measures with respect to key inflation-
sensitive items. As noted in the Monetary Policy
Report of April 2020, the uncertainty about the depth,
spread and duration of COVID-19 can produce drastic
changes in the outlook. Hence, macroeconomic
forecasts are subject to large revisions with every
incoming data on the pandemic. The RBI Act, however,
enjoins the Reserve Bank to, inter alia, publish and
Note: Net response is the difference between the respondents reporting explain in the MPR the forecasts of inflation for 6-18
optimism and those reporting pessimism. The range is -100 to 100. An
increase/decrease in net responses in respect of the selling price is optimistic/ months from the date of its publication. Taking into
pessimistic, while the increase/decrease in net response in respect of the cost
of raw materials is pessimistic/optimistic from the view point of respondent consideration the statutory requirements, the initial
firms. Therefore, higher negative values for the cost of raw materials indicate
conditions, the signals from forward-looking surveys
higher input price pressures and vice versa.
Source: Industrial Outlook Survey, RBI.
and estimates from time-series and structural models,
3 33 panellists participated in the September 2020 round of the Reserve Bank’s survey of professional forecasters.

)tnec
reP(
etar
noitaflnI
61-raM 61-peS 61-ceD 71-yaM 71-peS 71-ceD 81-yaM 81-peS 81-ceD 91-yaM 91-tpeS 02-naJ 02-yaM 02-peS
stnednopser
fo
noitroporP
)tnec
reP(
Three months ahead (Median) One yearahead (Median)
Three months ahead price increase more thanthecurrent
rate (RHS)
One yearahead price increase more than the currentrate(RHS)
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
CPI inflation is projected at 6.8 per cent in Q2:2020-
Chart I.6: Projection of CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
21; subsequently, large favourable base effects are

expected to pull it down to 5.4 per cent in Q3, and 4.5
per cent in Q4 (Chart I.6). The 50 per cent and the 70 8
per cent confidence intervals for headline inflation in

Q4:2020-21 are 3.2-5.9 per cent and 2.4-6.6 per cent,

respectively.

For 2021-22, assuming a normalisation of supply

chains with the availability of effective vaccines Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
against COVID-19, a normal monsoon, and no 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
major exogenous or policy shocks, structural model
estimates indicate that inflation will move in a range
Note: The fan chart depicts uncertainty around the baseline projection path.
of 4.1-4.4 per cent. The 50 per cent and the 70 per The baseline projections are conditioned upon the assumptions set out in
Table I.2. The thick red shaded area represents 50 per cent confidence interval,
cent confidence intervals for Q4:2021-22 are 2.5-5.8 implying that there is 50 per cent probability that the actual outcome will
be within the range given by the thick red shaded area. Like-wise, for 70 per
per cent and 1.6-6.6 per cent, respectively. cent and 90 per cent confidence intervals, there is 70 per cent and 90 per
cent probability, respectively, that the actual outcomes will be in the range
represented by the respective shaded areas.
As explained earlier, an unusually high amount
Source: RBI staff estimates.
of uncertainty surrounds the inflation outlook. In
particular, the persistence of the pandemic and delay key macroeconomic variables even more uncertain
in vaccine development could render projections of (Box I.1).
Box I.1: What will the Post-COVID Growth-Inflation Trajectory Look Like? Illustrative
Simulations from the Quarterly Projection Model
Under COVID-19 conditions, real GDP in India is projected (ii) recent inflation pressures taking a more persistent
to contract in 2020-21 under the baseline scenario, path a la 2009-10; (iii) a structural component crystallising
reflecting both demand and supply shocks. In contrast, in higher fiscal deficit and public debt, with implications
consumer price inflation remains elevated, suggesting that for the inflation outlook; and (iv) heightened volatility in
supply bottlenecks are outweighing the softening impact capital flows and exchange rates. The Quarterly Projection
expected from weaker demand. These counterintuitive Model (QPM)4 - a semi-structural, forward-looking, open
inflation dynamics have complicated the macroeconomic economy, calibrated, gap model in the New Keynesian
outlook. tradition - is used to explore these alternate scenarios.
The baseline scenario assumes that the recent spike in In Scenario 1, the faster normalisation of supply chains
inflation is transient, and that there is no second wave leads to lower output losses in 2020-21 relative to the
of infections. Accordingly, two alternate scenarios are baseline. Real GDP contracts by 7.5 per cent in this
explored. A favourable scenario (Scenario 1) assumes scenario vis-à-vis the baseline of 9.5 per cent (Chart I.1.1).
a faster normalisation of supply chains on the back of The GDP growth rebound in 2021-22 is stronger at 11.6
an early breakthrough in the development of vaccines. per cent in this benign scenario relative to 10.1 per cent
On the other hand, an adverse scenario (Scenario 2) is in the baseline. Favourable base effects, normal supply
built on assumptions of (i) a second wave of infections, chains and anchored inflation expectations contribute
pulling down global and domestic growth even further;
(contd.)
4 Benes, Jaromir, et al. (2016), “Quarterly Projection Model for India: Key Elements and Properties”, RBI Working Paper Series, No. 08/2016.

tnec
reP
50per cent CI 70per cent CI 90per cent CI
CI-Confidence Interval
Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Chart I.1.1. COVID-19 Outbreak: Illustrative Growth and Inflation Scenarios
a: GDP Growth b: Inflation
Source: RBI staff estimates.
to a reduction in inflation from 4.1 per cent in the than offsetting the impact of weak demand conditions
baseline to 4.0 per cent in Q4:2021-22, aligning it with both in 2020-21 and 2021-22. Volatile capital flows and
the target. downward pressure on the exchange rate add to pressure
on inflation, keeping it at 5.9 per cent in Q4:2021-22, close
In the adverse case (Scenario 2), real GDP records a
deeper contraction in 2020-21 (-11.5 per cent) and the to the upper tolerance band, and 1.8 percentage points
recovery is tepid in 2021-22 (7.2 per cent). Persistent above the baseline. Overall, this scenario brings to the fore
supply distortions, pressures on operating costs and the trade-offs between the inflation objective and that of
unhinged expectations keep inflation elevated, more stabilising output.
I.3 The Outlook for Growth Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) are also
supporting rural demand. On the other hand, urban
Real GDP declined by an unprecedented 23.9 per
demand remains weak. Indicators relating to industry
cent in Q1:2020-21 and domestic economic activity
and services present a mixed picture.
remains badly hit by the unrelenting pandemic. High
frequency indicators, which were looking up in June Turning to the forward-looking surveys, consumer
with the phased unlocking of the economy, levelled confidence for the year ahead improved in the
off in July amidst re-imposition of local lockdowns September 2020 round, driven by improved
sentiments on the general economic situation, the
due to a surge in fresh cases. In August, some
employment scenario and income (Chart I.7).5 The
indicators started improving again and strengthened
current situation index, however, fell to an all-time
in September. The agricultural sector remains a bright
low in September 2020.
spot, supported by a normal monsoon, robust kharif
sowing and adequate reservoir levels. The Pradhan Sentiments in the manufacturing sector for the
Mantri Garib Kalyan Rojgar Yojana and increased quarter ahead bounced back into the expansion zone
wages under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural in the July-September 2020 round of the Reserve
5 The survey is conducted by the Reserve Bank in 13 major cities and the September 2020 round is based on responses from 5,364 respondents.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart I.7: Consumer Confidence Table I.3: Business Expectations Surveys
Item NCAER FICCI Dun and CII
Business Overall Bradstreet Business
Confidence Business Composite Confidence
Index Confidence Business Index
(August Index Optimism (July 2020)
2020) (August Index
2020) (August
2020)
Current level of 46.4 50.6 29.4 41.0
the index
Index as per 77.4 42.9 49.4 53.4
previous survey
% change (q-o-q) -40.1 17.9 -40.6 -23.2
sequential
% change (y-o-y) -62.0 -14.4 -58.0 -31.2
Notes:
1. NCAER: National Council of Applied Economic Research.
2. FICCI: Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry.
3. CII: Confederation of Indian Industry.
Source: Consumer Confidence Survey, RBI.
Surveys by other agencies indicate a mixed picture
on future business expectations (Table I.3). According
Bank’s industrial outlook survey, reflecting optimism
to the PMI for September 2020, the one year ahead
on the overall business situation, production, order
business expectations of firms in the manufacturing
books, employment, exports and capacity utilisation
sector strengthened on hopes of improvement in
(Chart I.8).
demand, while the expectations of firms in the
services sector also turned somewhat optimistic after
Chart I.8: Business Assessment and Expectations four months of negative or neutral sentiment.
Professional forecasters polled in the September 2020
round of the Reserve Bank’s survey expected real
GDP growth to remain in negative territory through
Q3:2020-21, with a sharp pick up in Q1:2021-22 driven
by base effects (Chart I.9 and Table I.4).
Overall, the uncertainty about COVID-19’s spread
and trajectory continues to fog the outlook and makes
forecasts of real GDP growth extremely challenging.
The baseline assumes that economic activity will
gradually normalise in H2:2020-21, but a wide range
of outcomes is possible. Taking into account the
baseline assumptions, the survey indicators, and
model forecasts, real GDP is projected to contract
by 9.5 per cent in 2020-21, with risks tilted to the
Source: Industrial Outlook Survey, RBI.
downside: (-)9.8 per cent in Q2, (-)5.6 per cent in Q3

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Chart I.9: Professional Forecasters' Projection of Chart I.10: Projection of Growth in Real GDP (y-o-y)
Real GDP Growth
25.0
20.0 17.8
15.0
10.0
8.8
5.0
0.6
0.0
-3.2
-5.0
-10.0 -10.0
-15.0
-20.0 Note: The fan chart depicts uncertainty around the baseline projection
path. The baseline projections are conditioned upon the assumptions set out
-25.0 -23.9 in Table I.2. The thick green shaded area represents 50 per cent confidence
interval, implying that there is 50 per cent probability that the actual outcome
will be within the range given by the thick green shaded area. Like-wise, for 70
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
per cent and 90 per cent confidence intervals, there is 70 per cent and 90 per
cent probability, respectively, that the actual outcomes will be in the range
represented by the respective shaded areas.
Source: Survey of Professional Forecasters, RBI and National Statistical Office. Source: RBI staff estimates.
and 0.5 per cent in Q4 (Chart I.10 and Table I.4). For with the availability of effective vaccines, a normal
2021-22, assuming supply chains are fully restored monsoon, no major exogenous or policy shocks
and a large favourable base effect, structural model
Table I.4: Projections - Reserve Bank and
estimates indicate real GDP growth at 10.1 per cent.
Professional Forecasters
In such an environment, the significant monetary
(Per cent)
accommodation already provided through cuts in
2020-21 2021-22
the policy repo rate, and ample liquidity infusion
Reserve Bank’s Baseline Projections
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 4.5 4.1 through conventional and unconventional measures
Real GDP growth -9.5 10.1
and fiscal stimulus and other structural reform
Median Projections of Professional Forecasters measures announced by the government would be
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 4.2 - expected to add to the upside. On the other hand,
Real GDP growth -9.1 8.2
a more protracted spread of the pandemic, delayed
Gross domestic saving (per cent of GNDI) 26.0 27.0
Gross capital formation (per cent of GDP) 25.4 27.7 development and availability of vaccines, deviations
Credit growth of scheduled commercial banks 5.0 8.5
from the forecast of a normal monsoon in 2021-
Combined gross fiscal deficit (per cent of GDP) 12.0 9.0
Central government gross fiscal deficit 7.5 5.5 22 and global financial market volatility are the
(per cent of GDP)
key downside risks. The recent inflation elevation
Repo rate (end-period) 4.0 -
Yield on 91-days treasury bills (end-period) 3.4 4.0 acquiring a persistent character also poses downside
Yield on 10-year central government 6.0 6.5
risks to the baseline.
securities (end-period)
Overall balance of payments (US$ billion) 71.3 50.0
Merchandise exports growth -14.7 10.2 I.4 Balance of Risks
Merchandise imports growth -22.7 20.6
Current account balance (per cent of GDP) 0.5 -0.6 The baseline projections of inflation and growth
Note: GNDI: Gross National Disposable Income. are conditional on the assumptions relating to the
Sources: RBI staff estimates; and Survey of Professional Forecasters
(September 2020). key variables set out in the preceding sections.

tnec
reP




-5
-15
-25
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
50 per cent CI 70 per cent CI 90 per cent CI
CI - Confidence Interval
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2
Actual Projected
tnec
reP
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Uncertainties surrounding these assumptions, higher by around 40 bps and 20 bps, respectively
especially relating to COVID-19, could lead to large (Charts I.11a and I.12a).
deviations in either direction. This section assesses
(ii) International Crude Oil Prices
the balance of risks to the baseline projections in
Crude prices rebounded from May 2020 on the back
plausible alternative scenarios.
of supply cuts by oil producing countries (OPEC plus)
(i) Global Growth Uncertainties
and improved demand prospects due to the gradual
The global output losses from COVID-19 have easing of lockdown restrictions. Looking ahead,
turned out to be more severe than anticipated, international crude prices may increase more than
despite sizeable monetary and fiscal stimuli by expected in the event of a quicker containment of
many countries. Given the spread of the pandemic COVID-19, a sharper global recovery or an agreement
and recurrent bouts of resurgence, the recovery is among suppliers on further production cuts. For
expected to be protracted and there are large downside a net energy importer like India, the dynamics of
risks to the baseline assumptions. In such a scenario, international crude price movements have significant
the quarterly projection model’s simulations suggest macroeconomic implications. Assuming crude prices
that if global growth slips by 100 bps vis-à-vis the are 10 per cent higher, inflation could increase by 30
baseline, domestic growth and inflation could be bps and growth could be weaker by around 20 bps over
lower by around 40 bps and 20 bps, respectively, the baseline. Conversely, crude prices could soften
from the baseline trajectories. Conversely, an early from the current levels if the agreed production cuts
breakthrough in the development of an effective are not adhered to or a second wave of the pandemic
COVID-19 vaccine and its widespread distribution further weakens the demand for oil. In this event, if
could boost global trade and demand. In this scenario, crude prices fall by 10 per cent, inflation could ease by
assuming global growth surprises by 100 bps on the around 30 bps with a boost of 20 bps to growth (Charts
upside, domestic growth and inflation could edge I.11a and I.12a).
Chart I.11: Impact of Risk Scenarios on the Baseline Inflation Path
a: Crude Oil Prices and Global Demand Shocks b: Exchange Rate and Food Price Shocks
Source: RBI staff estimates.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Chart I.12: Impact of Risk Scenarios on the Baseline Growth Path
a: Crude Oil Prices and Global Demand Shocks b: Exchange Rate and Food Price Shocks
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Source: RBI staff estimates.
(iii) Exchange Rate reservoir storage are expected to soften food inflation
going forward. However, a delayed normalisation of
The INR has exhibited two-way movements over
supply chains, heavy rains and floods in some states
the past six months, reflecting global risk-on risk-
and demand-supply imbalances in key items such as
off sentiments driven by vacillating views on the
pulses could exert further upward pressure on the
spread and containment of COVID-19. A renewed
headline inflation and keep it higher by around 50
surge in COVID-19 infections and safe haven
bps (Charts I.11b and I.12b). On the other hand, an
demand could induce capital outflows across EMEs,
accelerated softening of food inflation due to an early
putting depreciation pressure on the INR. If the INR
restoration of supply chains, ample buffer stocks and
depreciates by 5 per cent from the baseline, inflation
efficient food stock management by the Government
could edge up by around 20 bps and GDP growth could
could bring headline inflation below the baseline by
be higher by 15 bps (Charts I.11b and I.12b). On the
other hand, if COVID-19 normalises quicker than up to 50 bps.
assumed under the baseline, strong capital inflows
I.5 Conclusion
could put appreciating pressure on the INR. In such a
At this juncture, global outlook is heavily contingent
scenario, if the INR appreciates by 5 per cent, inflation
upon the uncertain trajectory of COVID-19, with
and GDP growth could moderate by around 20 bps and
significant implications for key variables such as crude
15 bps, respectively, vis-à-vis the baseline.
oil and commodity prices, global growth, and financial
(iv) Food Inflation
markets. Consequently, the forecasts for domestic
Food inflation has remained elevated in recent inflation and output could change significantly
months driven by price pressures in vegetables, relative to baseline expectations. The behaviour of
cereals and protein items such as pulses, eggs and inflation holds the key to the conduct of monetary
meat. The normal south-west monsoon, increased policy going forward. The gradual restoration of
sowing of kharif crops, moderate MSP hikes, and high supply lines, good progress of kharif sowing, sizeable

tniop
egatnecreP
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Quarters
Higher crude price Lower crude price
Global growth recovery Global growth slowdown
tniop
egatnecreP
Quarters
Exchange rate appreciation Exchange rate depreciation
Higher foodinflation Lower food inflation
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
buffer stocks, effective food supply management and and high food inflation acquiring a structural character
a faster progress on the vaccine could pull inflation and spilling to non-food items are clear and present
down from current elevated levels and open up space dangers that could potentially push inflation above the
for addressing the urgent need to repair and revive baseline. By current assessment, real GDP growth can
the economy from the blows it has suffered from the post a modest recovery during H2:2020-21, aided by
pandemic. Yet, the downside risks from a delayed early containment of COVID-19 and the monetary and
vaccine, more than expected persistence of supply fiscal stimuli. Nonetheless, it is prudent to recognise
bottlenecks, volatile international financial markets and brace up for the downside risks described earlier.

II. Prices and Costs
A broad-based elevation in consumer price index (CPI) inflation between March and July 2020 emanated from
tight demand supply balances in protein-based food items, floods damaging the output of vegetables, increase in retail
margins due to the pandemic, tax increases in petrol and diesel, safe haven demand for gold and cost-push pressures.
At the time of the Monetary Policy Report (MPR) of 1030 urban markets and 998 villages that accounted
April 2020, headline inflation1, which was ruling for only 88 per cent of the total sample. As such, the
above the upper tolerance level of the inflation target, data collected did not meet the adequacy criteria for
was projected to decline, with rabi crop arrivals generating robust estimates of CPI at the state level.
inducing a softening of food inflation. COVID-19 has Headline indices for April and May were imputed
drastically altered that prognosis. The pandemic and for business continuity purposes. In its resolution of
the response in the form of social distancing and the August 6, 2020, the monetary policy committee (MPC)
severest lockdown in the world caused a virtual seizure expressed the view that for the purpose of monetary
of transactions in non-essential items and threw policy formulation and conduct, the imputed prints
into complete disarray the price collection system. for April and May can be regarded as a break in the
The National Statistical Office (NSO) suspended the CPI series. In terms of acceptable standards of data
publication of the headline consumer price index collection, it is appropriate to compare the headline
(CPI) for April and May. It was not until July 13, 2020 inflation reading for July 2020 with that of March
with the lifting of some pandemic-related restrictions 2020. The surge in inflation by 90 basis points
and the partial restoration of non-essential activities between these reference dates was diffused across the
that the provisional index for June 2020 could be board, partly offset by a significant moderation in fuel
compiled. Even so, prices could be collected from inflation (Chart II.1).
Chart II.1: CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
Sources: National Statistical Office (NSO); and RBI staff estimates.
1 Headline inflation is measured by year-on-year changes in all India CPI Combined (Rural and Urban).

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act, 1934 (amended June and persisted in July-August due to a variety of
in 2016) enjoins the RBI to set out deviations of actual shocks: an increase in the prices of vegetables due to
inflation outcomes from projections, if any, and floods in eastern India; elevated edible oils prices on
explain the underlying reasons thereof. The April the back of higher international prices; pressures on
2020 MPR had projected a moderation in CPI inflation meat and fish prices once the initial apprehension
during H1:2020-21 from 6.6 per cent in Q4:2019-20 of their link with COVID-19 infections was allayed;
to 4.8 per cent in Q1:2020-21 and to 4.4 per cent in and supply bottlenecks in the availability of cereals
Q2:2020-21, with the caveat that the uncertainty and pulses. From February 2020, international gold
prices increased to historic highs on safe haven
about the depth, spread and duration of COVID-19
demand, pushing up prices of personal care and
could produce drastic changes in these forecasts.
effects by around 10 per cent. International crude
With data for Q1 being regarded as a break in the
oil prices jumped from US $35 per barrel assumed
CPI series as cited above, actual inflation outcomes
in the April MPR to US $44 per barrel by end-August.
overshot projections by 2.3 percentage points in Q2
Domestic petrol and diesel pump prices rose more
(Chart II.2), largely reflecting the destructive impact
than proportionately in view of the sharp increase
of COVID-19.
in excise duties on petrol and diesel by `10 per litre
Price spikes became evident in April during the
and `13 per litre, respectively, and state VAT by up
nation-wide lockdown as usurious margins chased
to `7 per litre in the post-lockdown period. Inflation
panic buying and stocking. Although there was some
excluding food, fuel, petrol, diesel and gold from the
ebbing in May, these price pressures resurfaced in
CPI edged up as costs associated with disruption of
supply chains, labour shortages and transportation
fed into a host of goods and services. Overall, the
Chart II.2: CPI Inflation (y-o-y):
Projection versus Actual supply shocks caused by COVID-19 overwhelmed the
collapse in demand.
II.1 Base Effect and Momentum
A decomposition of changes in year-on-year (y-o-y)
inflation2 indicates that the sharp increase in
headline inflation between March and July was the
result of a substantial and broad-based jump in
price momentum. By August, the price momentum
moderated across food and core groups, and declined
in respect of the fuel group; however, favourable
base effects across food and core also diminished
#: The NSO did not publish inflation rates for April and May 2020.
in August, resulting in headline inflation remaining
*: Projections for entire Q2:2020-21 vis-a-vis actual average inflation during
July-August 2020. broadly unchanged at 6.7 per cent during July and
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
August (Chart II.3).
2 A change in CPI year-on-year (y-o-y) inflation between any two months is the difference between the current month-on-month (m-o-m) change in the
price index (momentum) and the m-o-m change in the price index 12 months earlier (base effect). For more details see Box I.1 of the MPR, September 2014.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.3: CPI Inflation – Momentum and Base Effects
a: CPI Headline b: CPI Food and Beverages
c: CPI Fuel and Light d: CPI excluding Food and Fuel
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
The distribution of CPI inflation over January-August II.2 Drivers of Inflation
20203 reveals that the median inflation rate shifted up
A historical decomposition in a vector autoregression
to 4.6 per cent from around 4 per cent in recent years,
(VAR) framework can help to disentangle the relative
indicating a broad-based increase in price pressures
role of various factors driving the inflation process.
(Chart II.4). The diffusion indices of price changes in
This empirical analysis indicates the predominant
CPI items4 on a non-seasonally adjusted basis5 also
role of unfavourable supply side shocks in keeping
attest to this cross-sectional spread of price increases
inflation at elevated levels in recent quarters. Food
in the post-lockdown period (Chart II.5).
supply and crude oil price shocks together contributed
3 Excluding April-May 2020 imputed inflation data.
4 The CPI diffusion index, a measure of dispersion of price changes, categorises items in the CPI basket according to whether their prices have risen,
remained stagnant or fallen over the previous month. A reading above 50 for the diffusion index signals a broad expansion or generalisation of price
increases and a reading below 50 signals broad-based price decline.
5 The non-availability of CPI item level data for the period March-May 2020 hindered seasonal adjustments in the item level series for the recent period.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart II.4: Average CPI Inflation (y-o-y) Chart II.5: Diffusion Indices: CPI
(Kernel Density Estimates) (M-o-M Non-Seasonally Adjusted)
* The inflation numbers for 2020 do not include April-May imputed inflation
rates.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
around 80 per cent of the deviation in inflation from repo rate cuts, expansion in money supply and the
target in Q2:2020-21 (Chart II.6a). Muted demand firming up of equity prices – representing asset prices
conditions contributed negatively to the inflation – together contributed around 10 per cent to the
deviation by around 10 per cent in Q2 but were inflation deviation in Q2.6
dwarfed by the supply-side shocks. The sizeable
Chart II.6: Drivers of CPI Inflation
a: Decomposition of CPI Inflation*
* Deviation from deterministic trend.
Note: Estimated using a vector autoregression with changes in oil prices in US$, changes in INR/US$ exchange rate, changes in BSE Sensex, CPI inflation, output gap, changes in
rural wages, policy rate and changes in money supply using data from Q4:2010-11 to Q2:2020-21.
Sources: NSO; RBI; Petroleum Planning & Analysis Cell (PPAC); BSE; Labour Bureau; and RBI Staff estimates. (Contd.)
6 Historical decomposition is used to estimate the individual impact of shocks on movements in inflation over a sample period, based on a vector
auto regression (VAR). The VAR can be written in reduced form as: Y =c + A Y + e; where e represents a vector of shocks [oil price shock; exchange
t t-1 t t
rate shock; asset price shock; supply shock (inflation shock); demand shock; wage shock; policy rate shock; and money supply shock]. Using Wold
decomposition, Y can be represented as a function of its deterministic trend and sum of all the shocks e. This formulation facilitates decomposition of
t t
the deviation of inflation from its deterministic trend into the sum of contributions from various shocks. The supply shocks represent the unexplained
component of the CPI inflation.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
b: Contribution of Goods and Services c: Contribution of Imported Inflation
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
The contribution of perishable goods (non-durable prices also contributed to the surge (Chart II.7b).
goods with a 7-day recall7) in overall inflation, during Inflation in prices of oils and fats and spices was in
June-August 2020, remained elevated at 46.8 per cent double digits in H1:2020-21 creating another pressure
due to supply disruptions. Semi-perishable goods (non- point. Taken together, the price build-up was close to
durable goods with a 30-day recall) and durable goods historical average (Chart II.8).
contributed to headline inflation to the extent of 35.7
In the case of cereals (weight of 9.7 per cent in the CPI
per cent. During June-August 2020, the contribution
and 21.1 per cent in the food and beverages group),
of services to headline inflation also edged up to
the conundrum of co-existing supply gluts and price
17.5 per cent compared to February 2020 (15.1 per
pressures complicated inflation dynamics. Cereals
cent), indicating generalised cost-push pressures
inflation remained elevated despite massive buffer
(Chart II.6b). Contributions to headline inflation from
stockpiling after the nation-wide lockdown on account
imported components8 turned positive and amounted
of higher procurement. With the easing of lockdown
to 0.2 percentage points in August 2020 (Chart II.6c).
conditions, cereals prices moderated in July-August
Food Group 2020.
Food inflation, which was at 7.8 per cent in March, Inflation in prices of vegetables (weight of 6.0 per cent
increased to 8.4 per cent by July-August, reflecting in the CPI and 13.2 per cent in the food and beverages
primarily the impact of adverse supply shocks. Protein- group) exhibited high volatility (Chart II.9). Potato
based food items, especially meat products and pulses, price inflation remained elevated at 79.5 per cent in
emerged as the key driver and their contribution August 2020, contributing 10.6 per cent to headline
to overall food inflation also remained elevated inflation. Unseasonal rain in Uttar Pradesh in March
(Chart II.7a). Elevated inflation pressures in milk 2020 and cyclone-related damage to the crop in West
7 The CPI weighting diagrams use the modified mixed reference period (MMRP) data based on the 2011-12 Consumer Expenditure Survey conducted by
the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO). Under MMRP, data are collected on expenditure incurred for frequently purchased items – edible oil, eggs, fish,
meat, vegetables, fruits, spices, beverages, processed foods, pan, tobacco and intoxicants – during the last seven days; for clothing, bedding, footwear,
education, medical (institutional), durable goods, during the last 365 days; and for all other food, fuel and light, miscellaneous goods and services including
non-institutional medical services, rents and taxes, data relate to the last 30 days.
8 Petrol; diesel; liquefied petroleum gas (LPG); kerosene; electronic goods; gold; silver; chemical and chemical products; metal and metal products; and
vegetables oils.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart II.7: CPI Food Inflation (y-o-y)
a: Contributions b: Drivers of CPI Protein-based Food Inflation
*: Includes meat & fish, egg, milk and pulses.
**: Includes cereals, fruits, sugar, non-alocoholic beverages and prepared meals.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI food and beverages. Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI-Protein based food.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
Bengal in May 2020, the two major potato producing inflation. These spikes generally occur in the lean
states, resulted in considerable supply disruptions. months of July-September during which the entire
Price pressure in potatoes were further exacerbated domestic supply is met through onions procured in
by labour shortages at mandis, lower stock availability the rabi season. With the arrival of the late kharif crop
in cold storage and higher exports during 2019-20. and a large rabi crop, onion prices went into deflation
of (-) 4.0 per cent in August 2020.
Inflation in onion prices surged from September 2019
onwards and reached a peak of 327.4 per cent in Prices of tomatoes picked up during June-July 2020
December 2019, contributing 4.8 percentage points to due to lower supplies coming from damage to crops
food inflation and 2.1 percentage points to headline in some regions from pre-monsoon rains. Anecdotal
Chart II.8: Financial Year Price Build-up Chart II.9: Drivers of Vegetable Inflation (y-o-y)
(August over March)
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI- food and beverages. Note: Figures in parentheses indicate items’ weights in CPI-vegetables.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates. Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
evidence suggests that farmers in some states/areas 2019-20 over 2018-19 final estimates) and especially,
planted less area with tomatoes than a year ago due urad production (by 44.9 per cent) led to persistent
to the collapse of prices in major centres in May 2020, price pressures, which were accentuated by lockdown-
which might have also contributed to the spike in related supply uncertainties and stockpiling by
prices in July. Tomato prices eased slightly in August consumers during April-May 2020. With the easing
2020, with fresh supplies coming into the market. of the lockdown and improved kharif sowing, pulses
inflation eased to 14.4 per cent in August.
Inflation in prices of fruits (weight of 2.9 per cent in
the CPI and 6.3 per cent within the food and beverages Inflation in prices of meat and fish (weight of 3.6 per
group) declined from a peak of 5.8 per cent in January cent in the CPI and 7.9 per cent within the food and
2020 to 0.1 per cent in July 2020 but picked up to 1.0 beverages group) increased from 9.2 per cent in March
per cent in August 2020 due to higher demand for dry to 18.9 per cent in June 2020 before moderating to
fruits during the pandemic. 16.5 per cent in August 2020. Prices of chicken and
eggs eased during February-March 2020 due to a fall
Within protein-based food items (weight of 13.0
in consumption demand on pandemic fears, with
per cent in the CPI and 28.4 per cent in the food
poultry farmers culling to avoid feeding costs. With
and beverages group), inflation in prices of pulses
demand recovering from May, inflation in prices
(weight of 2.4 per cent in the CPI and 5.2 per cent
of chicken rose to 25.4 per cent in June 2020 while
in the food and beverages group) exhibits a cobweb
inflation in prices of eggs increased to 10.1 per cent
phenomenon – lower production and higher prices
in August 2020. With the onset of the rainy season,
in a deficit season spur increased acreage in the
prices of mutton, fish and chicken eased as per the
following season, leading to excess supply and
usual seasonal pattern in July-August 2020.
consequent fall in prices. In the short-run, demand-
supply mismatches are met mainly through imports, Milk and products price inflation (weight of 6.6
the transit time varying and imposing volatility per cent in the CPI and 14.4 per cent in the food and
(Chart II.10). The decline in kharif pulses production beverages group), which were impacted by price hikes
(by 4.6 per cent in the 4th advance estimates for by major co-operatives last year (in May 2019 and
December 2019), remained elevated at 6.2 per cent in
Chart II.10: Pulses - Demand Supply Balance August due to supply disruptions. Higher global prices
of skimmed milk products also impacted domestic
prices.
Inflation in prices of sugar and confectionery (weight
of 1.4 per cent in the CPI and 3.0 per cent in the food
and beverages group) moderated from 3.9 per cent in
March to 2.9 per cent in June due to the decline in
demand from bulk segments (hotels and restaurants).
In July 2020, Andhra Pradesh increased the PDS
sugar prices from `20 per kg to `34 per kg imparting
pressures to both PDS and non-PDS sugar prices.
Inflation in prices of oils and fats (weight of 3.6 per
cent in the CPI and 7.8 per cent in the food and
beverages group) increased in January 2020 and
Sources: Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare; DGCIS; CACP; NSO;
Labour Bureau; and RBI staff estimates.
remained elevated, reaching 12.4 per cent in August

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
2020. The rise in global prices of this highly import prices from April and linked them to international
dependent item was the major reason for the firming prices movements with price revisions at the start of
up of domestic prices. Domestically, lower production every month. As a result, domestic kerosene prices
of rapeseed, mustard and soybeans (as per the 4th fell sharply during April-May, tracking international
advance estimates for 2019-20) added to the price prices. By July 2020, international prices reversed, and
pressures. domestic LPG and kerosene prices edged up (Chart
II.11b and Chart II.11c). Prices of items of rural fuel
Fuel Group
consumption registered some moderation in the post-
Inflation in fuel prices moderated from 6.4 per cent in
lockdown period, but the contribution of electricity
February 2020 to 0.5 per cent in June due to a steep fall
prices to overall fuel inflation increased (Chart II.11a).
in domestic LPG and kerosene prices in tandem with
CPI excluding Food and Fuel
the collapse in international benchmark product prices
(Chart II.11a). Subsidised domestic kerosene prices CPI inflation excluding food and fuel (core inflation)
firmed up till March and the domestic kerosene price rose from 3.9 per cent in February-March 2020 to
was higher than international prices for the first time. 5.6 per cent in July-August (Chart II.12). This price
Accordingly, oil marketing companies (OMCs) stopped build-up was much higher than the historical average
the calibrated increase in administered kerosene (Chart II.13).
Chart II.11: CPI Fuel Group Inflation
a: Drivers (y-o-y)
*: Includes diesel [excl. conveyance], coke, coal, charcoal and other fuels.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI- fuel and light.
b: LPG Price Movements c: Kerosene Price Movements
Notes: (1)The international price for LPG is based on spot prices for Saudi Butane and Propane, combined in the ratio of 60:40 respectively. These international product
prices are indicative import prices. Further details are available at www.ppac.org.in.
(2) The indicative international price for kerosene is the Singapore Jet Kero spot price.
(3) The domestic prices of LPG and kerosene represent the average prices at four metros from Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL).
Sources: NSO;Bloomberg; IOCL; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.12: Exclusion-based CPI Inflation (y-o-y) Chart II.13: CPI excluding Food and Fuel –
Financial Year Price Buildup (August over March)
Notes: (1) Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
(2) Derived as residual from headline CPI. Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI excluding food and fuel.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates. Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
International crude oil prices plummeted after the per litre at end-March to `84.8 per litre by end-August
imposition of lockdowns globally, pulling down the (Chart II.14a). On May 6, 2020, the central government
price of Indian basket of crude oil to around US$ 16 raised the excise duty on petrol and diesel again10 by
per barrel on April 21, 2020. Thereafter, the Indian `10 per litre and `13 per litre, respectively. There
basket crude oil price increased to US$ 44 per barrel by was, however, no commensurate increase in the
end-August 2020. With the incidence of higher taxes, pump prices, as it was absorbed into the large mark-
domestic petrol pump prices9 increased from `72.4 up over international prices.11 Faced with large
Chart II.14: Movements in International and Domestic Petroleum Product Prices
a: Petrol - Domestic and International Prices b. Petrol and Diesel Inflation (y-o-y)
Note: International petrol prices denote the spot price of Singapore gasoline.
Domestic prices represent the average pump prices of four metros as reported
by Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL).
Sources: NSO; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; Bloomberg; IOCL; and RBI staff estimates.
9 Proxied by the average pump prices for petrol in the 4 major metros.
10 Excise duty on petrol and diesel was earlier increased by ` 3 per litre each on March 14, 2020.
11 Petrol and diesel pump prices were largely unchanged during the lockdown period by the OMCs.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
revenue shortfalls, various states also increased value and diesel increased from 4.0 per cent in February to
added taxes (VATs) since early April12. Coupled with 5.4 per cent in July-August 2020. A major contributor
the increase in international prices, this pushed up was the increase in gold prices to historic highs by
domestic pump prices sharply during June. CPI petrol August 2020. CPI inflation excluding food, fuel, petrol,
inflation jumped from 3.2 per cent in February to 12.1 diesel, gold and silver also increased from 3.6 per cent
per cent in August 2020. On the other hand, inflation in in February 2020 to 4.5 per cent in July-August 2020,
respect of wholesale prices of petrol and diesel, which indicating broad-based cost-push pressures in the post-
captures prices net of any tax impact, moved from (-) lockdown period that were more acute in urban areas
1.5 per cent in February to (-) 33.4 per cent in May than in rural areas (Box II.1).
and to (-) 14.2 per cent in August, broadly mirroring
Inflation in the prices of goods component of CPI
international price movements (Chart II.14b).
excluding food, fuel, petrol, diesel, gold and silver
Even abstracting from the effects of prices of petroleum (with a weight of 20.7 per cent in CPI) rose from 2.9
products, CPI inflation excluding food, fuel, petrol per cent in February 2020 to 4.7 per cent in August
Box II.1: Whose Inflation is It? The Rural-Urban Divide
Compilation of all-India CPI entails a bottom-up During June-August, 2020 urban inflation was predominantly
aggregation process, starting from state-wise price concentrated in the non-food sub-groups. Inflation in
indices for rural and urban areas. Any inflation impulse the prices of household goods and services was
at the national level has thus an underlying rural-urban higher in urban areas by 2.9 percentage points. On the
distinction as was evident in the onion price shock of other hand, rural areas saw substantially higher
November 2019-February 2020 and the COVID-19 related vegetables inflation in the post-lockdown period
lockdown shock of June-August 2020. The former saw (Chart II.1.2).
similar inflation distributions in the rural and urban areas
In the past, these divergences have been short-lived;
with fat tails due to spike in vegetable inflation, whereas
over time, there is an inherent tendency for rural
the rural-urban inflation distributions showed divergence
and urban inflation to converge and this is reflected in
post lockdown (Chart II.1.1).
data for most recent months (Bhoi et al., 2020). An
Chart II.1.1: Distribution of Rural and Urban Inflation during Recent Price Shocks
a: Onion Price Shock (Nov 2019-Feb 2020) b: Post-lockdown (Jun-Aug 2020)
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
(Contd.)
12 During April-May 2020, VAT on petrol was increased in a range of `1 per litre to `3.25 per litre while that on diesel was increased in a range
of `1 per litre to `7.10 per litre in the four metropolitan cities (Chennai, Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata). On July 31, 2020, Delhi reduced the VAT on diesel,
effectively reducing its prices by `8.4 per litre.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.1.2: CPI Rural-Urban Inflation
Source: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
empirical exercise using fully modified ordinary least Adj. R2 = 0.93; Engle-Granger tau-statistic and z-statistic confirms
cointegration at 1 per cent level of significance.
squares (FMOLS), based on monthly inflation data
for January 2012-July 2020 confirms a co-integrating Error Correction Mechanism
relationship, i.e., there exists a long-run co-movement urban inflation =
–0.00 – 0.12 + 0.78 rural inflation +
between rural and urban inflation at the all-India level. t-1
(0.99) (0.02) (0.00)
Moreover, the significant error correction term [(-)
0.19 urban inflation (–1) – 0.18 rural inflation (–1) ...(2)
0.12] suggests that 12 per cent of the previous period’s (0.07) (0.04)
deviation between actual and long-run inflation is Adj. R2 = 0.78; LM test for the null hypothesis of no serial correlation up
to 3 lags (p-value) =0.26.
corrected every month.
Note: Figures in parentheses denote p-values.
Long run-cointegration Equation
References:
urban inflation =
0.11+ 0.87 rural inflation + 1.62 DUM 2013 + 1.90 DUM 2018 ...(1) Bhoi, Binod. et al. (2020) “Rural Urban Inflation Dynamics”,
(0.73) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) mimeo.
2020 due to pan, tobacco and intoxicants, transport Other Measures of Inflation
and communications goods, clothing and footwear
Inflation measured by sectoral CPIs for agricultural
and household goods (Chart II.15a).
labourers (CPI-AL) and rural labourers (CPI-RL)
Core services inflation (with a weight of 23.0 per cent after hovering above the headline CPI inflation
in CPI) rose from 4.4 per cent in February 2020 to 4.7 during 2019-20, with a sharp fall in food and fuel
components, fell below CPI-Combined inflation
per cent in August 2020, led by prices of transportation
during July and August 2020. Inflation in terms
and communications services as well as those of
of CPI for industrial workers (CPI-IW) also fell
household services, the latter due to an increase in
below headline CPI inflation in March 2020 with
price of services provided by domestic servants, cooks
a steep decline in food inflation. Thereafter, a
and sweepers (Chart II.15b).

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart II.15: Contribution to CPI Inflation excluding Food, Fuel, Petrol, Diesel, Gold and Silver
a: Goods (y-o-y) b: Services (y-o-y)
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
further moderation in inflation in the food group, kept CPI-IW inflation below headline CPI
coupled with disinflation in the clothing group, (Chart II.16a).
Chart II.16: Alternative Inflation Measures
a: Various Measures of Inflation (y-o-y) b: CPI-WPI Divergence among Selected Commodities
(Average during June-August 2020)
Sources: NSO; Labour Bureau; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Inflation in terms of the wholesale price index exclusion-based measures have moved up – barring
(WPI) was on a different trail altogether. It sank into a slight reversal in August – suggesting generalised
deflation in April, which persisted through till July, inflationary pressures (Charts II.12 and II.17).
with non-food manufactured products in deflation
II.3 Costs
for over a year. Fuel inflation moved into negative
The wholesale cost of farm inputs and industrial
territory in March 2020 as a result of the large
raw materials entered into deflationary territory in
contraction in mineral oil inflation during March that
March and dipped to a 55-month low in May 2020,
persisted till August 2020. In August, WPI inflation
turned marginally positive (0.2 per cent) due to a mirroring soft global oil and other commodity prices,
sharp uptick in inflation in non-food manufactured and subdued demand (Chart II.18). There was a
products. WPI food inflation remained above 4 per moderation in coal inflation, given low demand
cent but exhibited lower inflationary pressures than from end-user industries for steel and power, and
in CPI across major sub-groups (Charts II.16b). The contraction in international coal prices. Among
WPI measures basic prices less trade discounts, other non-food items, deflation in prices of fibres
thereby leaving out indirect taxes by definition while intensified during April-August 2020 on account of
retail prices are inclusive of taxes. Gross domestic subdued exports and domestic demand.
product (GDP) and gross value added (GVA) deflators
Amongst farm sector inputs, inflation in the case of
sank in Q1:2020-21 in line with the WPI.
fodder prices moderated during June-August 2020,
Trimmed means of inflation provide a measure of owing to the early onset and good distribution of
underlying inflation dynamics and are computed by monsoon. In the case of fertilisers and pesticides,
statistically eliminating large positive and negative inflation remained muted, reflecting deflation in
changes. Exclusion based measures of CPI also international prices of phosphate, di-ammonium
capture persistent trends in inflation by removing phosphate (DAP), triple superphosphate (TSP) and
volatile components. Both trimmed means and urea. Electricity prices have eased since April in view
Chart II.17: Trimmed Means of Chart II.18: Farm and Non farm Input
CPI Inflation (y-o-y) Cost Inflation (y-o-y)
*: Comprises primary non-food articles, minerals, coal, aviation turbine fuel,
high speed diesel, naphtha, bitumen, furnace oil, lube oil, petroleum coke,
electricity, cotton yarn and paper & pulp from WPI.
$: Comprises high speed diesel, fodder, electricity, fertilisers, pesticides, and
agricultural and forestry machinery from WPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates. Sources: Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Growth in nominal rural wages, both for agricultural
Chart II.19: Wage Growth (y-o-y) and Inflation
in Rural Areas (y-o-y) and non-agricultural labourers, showed a sharp uptick
in May 202013 (Chart II.19).
Growth in staff costs in the organised sector decreased
for listed firms in the manufacturing and services
sectors during Q1:2020-21 over layoffs and salary
cuts. However, unit labour costs (measured as a
ratio of staff cost to value of production) increased
during Q1:2020-21 due to contraction in the value
of production14. Unit labour cost rose from 6.8 per
cent in Q4:2019-20 to 10.2 per cent in Q1:2020-21 for
firms in the manufacturing sector15 and from 29.2 per
cent to 35.5 per cent for firms in the services sector16
(Chart II.20).
Manufacturing firms polled in the Reserve Bank’s
Sources: NSO; Labour Bureau; and RBI staff estimates.
industrial outlook survey reported higher input
of weak demand conditions. Inflation in agricultural cost pressures during Q2:2020-21 owing to supply
machinery and implements eased to 1.2 per cent shortages and transport delays (Chart II.21). Salary
during April-August 2020 due to subdued momentum outgoes, which fell in Q1 as firms reported contraction
in prices of tractors and agriculture implements. in the level of employment, rose in Q2 and are
Chart II.20: Labour Cost in Manufacturing and Chart II.21: Manufacturing Firms’ Cost
Services: Staff Cost Per Unit Value of Production Conditions based on Industrial Outlook Survey
*: Listed companies with net worth more than Rs.5 billion were required to adopt
the new accounting standards, ‘Ind-AS’, by Q1:2016-17 and rest of the listed
companies by Q1:2017-18, as mandated by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. The
impact of the transition appears muted at the aggregate level in terms of growth
rates, although the same may not hold for the ratios. The data may be accordingly Note: ‘Net response’ is the difference between the percentage of respondents
read with appropriate caveats. reporting increase in prices and those reporting decrease.
Sources: Capitaline database; and RBI staff estimates. Sources: Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey; and RBI staff estimates.
13 Data for April 2020 could not be collected by the Labour Bureau due to the lockdown. Data collection remained constrained for May 2020 as well.
14 The results hold for the common set of companies also: unit labour cost for common 1521 manufacturing firms increased from 6.9 per cent in
Q4:2019-20 to 10.2 per cent in Q1:2020-21 and for common 543 services firms increased from 31.0 per cent to 38.0 per cent.
15 Provisional estimate based on 1601 manufacturing firms
16 Provisional estimate based on 613 services firms.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
expected to increase further in Q3. The cost of finance management holds the key to containment of price
remained subdued. Reflecting cost pressures, selling pressures within broader supply side reforms. Timely
prices edged up in Q2 and are expected to firm up and adequate release of cereal stocks including
further in Q4 and Q1:2021-22. Households’ inflation sales, meeting shortfalls in the availability of pulses
expectations, as polled in the September 2020 round through imports, rationalisation of the import duty
of the Reserve Bank’s survey, remained elevated but structure for pulses and for edible oils for which
eased modestly over the three-months ahead horizon. around two-thirds of domestic demand is met by
imports, steps to fully restore supply chains for
Manufacturing as well as services firms polled for
poultry, goat and sheep, and adequate procurement
the purchasing managers’ index (PMI) reported
and buffer stocks for stabilisation of vegetables
sharp declines in both input cost and selling prices
prices, particularly key vegetables like onions and
during Q1:2020-21. In August-September 2020, input
potatoes are the main elements of this approach.
prices for the manufacturing firms registered an
Furthermore, the high level of taxes on petroleum
uptick as raw material costs, particularly for iron and
products needs to be revisited to ameliorate cost
steel, rose. Output prices, however, remained tepid
push pressures as the economy recovers. Effective
and broadly stabilised in September after declining
supply side interventions and the presence of large
for five months in a row. For services firms, higher
favourable base effects are expected to bring about
fuel and food prices pushed up input costs during
a moderation in inflation in H2:2020-21 but the
Q2:2020-21, leading to a soft uptick in selling prices
uncertainties surrounding the COVID-19 trajectory
in August-September.
pose substantial risks to the outlook. In absence
II.4 Conclusion
of sufficient supply-side responses, the risk of cost
Inflationary pressures have firmed up in H1 on push pressures translating to a generalised increase
supply shocks and cost push pressures brought about in inflation and its persistence is a serious threat to
by COVID-19. In this situation, proactive supply side the evolving macroeconomic outlook.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
III. Demand and Output
After an unprecedented decline in fixed investment, private consumption and exports in Q1:2020-21, aggregate
demand recorded sequential improvement in Q2 on the back of robust rural demand and some uptick in urban
consumption. On the supply side, the steep decline in manufacturing and plummeting construction activity in Q1
was followed by a gradual easing of contraction in Q2.
In the period following the release of the April 2020 southwest monsoon in the 2020 season and higher
MPR, economic activity plunged into a contraction kharif sowing have brightened the outlook for rural
in Q1:2020-21 that is unparalleled in India’s history. consumption. With the gradual unlocking of the
The combined impact of demand compression and economy from May/June 2020, signs of stabilisation
supply disruptions has produced an unprecedented appeared but the resurgence of infections especially
decline in fixed investment, private consumption and in the interior part of the country levelled them off
exports. Government expenditure, including in the in July. High frequency indicators exhibited signs of
form of counter-pandemic measures, has cushioned some recovery again in August, which strengthened
the deterioration. Without it, the downturn would in September 2020.
have been even deeper. On the supply side, the
III.1 Aggregate Demand
stringent nation-wide lockdown, social distancing
norms and the mass exodus of migrant workers led The August 2020 data release of the National
to a steep decline in manufacturing and plummeting Statistical Office (NSO) revealed that aggregate
construction activity. Trade and transportation went demand measured in terms of year-on-year changes
down to a fraction of their pre-COVID-19 levels. Credit in real gross domestic product (GDP) underwent a
conditions also remained muted. The only silver lining contraction of 23.9 per cent in Q1:2020-21, taking
was the resilience of agriculture and allied activities on GDP to its lowest in the history of the quarterly series
the back of record production of rabi and horticulture (Table III.1 and Chart III.1a). As reflected in quarter-
crops in 2019-20. The bountiful and widespread on-quarter (q-o-q) seasonally adjusted annualised
Table III.1: Real GDP Growth
(y-o-y, per cent)
Item 2018-19 2019-20 Weighted 2018-19 (FRE) 2019-20 (PE) 2020-21
Contribution*
(FRE) (PE) 2018-19 2019-20 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
1. Private final consumption expenditure 7.2 5.3 4.0 3.0 6.7 8.8 7.0 6.2 5.5 6.4 6.6 2.7 -26.7
2. Government final consumption expenditure 10.1 11.8 1.0 1.2 8.5 10.8 7.0 14.4 6.2 14.2 13.4 13.6 16.4
3. Gross fixed capital formation 9.8 -2.8 3.0 -0.9 12.9 11.5 11.4 4.4 4.6 -3.9 -5.2 -6.5 -47.1
4. Exports 12.3 -3.6 2.4 -0.8 9.5 12.5 15.8 11.6 3.2 -2.2 -6.1 -8.5 -19.8
5. Imports 8.6 -6.8 2.0 -1.6 5.9 18.7 10.0 0.8 2.1 -9.4 -12.4 -7.0 -40.4
GDP at market prices 6.1 4.2 6.1 4.2 7.1 6.2 5.6 5.7 5.2 4.4 4.1 3.1 -23.9
FRE: First Revised Estimates; PE: Provisional Estimates.
*: Component-wise contributions to growth do not add up to GDP growth in the table because change in stocks, valuables and discrepancies are not
included.
Source: National Statistical Office (NSO).

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.1: GDP Growth, its Constituents and Momentum
a: Weighted Contribution of the Components b: GDP Growth and its Momentum
to GDP Growth
Note: SAAR - Seasonally adjusted annualised rate.
Sources: NSO, Government of India; and RBI staff estimates.
rates (SAAR) of GDP, this was essentially a cliff effect expenditure tapered off in August after robust growth
embodied in a sudden and steep drop in momentum in July, it strengthened in later part of September with
in that quarter (Chart III.1b). Moreover, excluding additional support from supplementary demands of
the support from government expenditure, real GDP `1.67 lakh crore by the central government.
would have slumped by 29.3 per cent. Nowcasting – the prediction of the present or the
very near future of the state of the economy – has
In Q2, aggregate demand recorded sequential
become popular among central banks in the face of
improvement on the back of robust rural demand
long lags and frequent revisions in official measures of
and some uptick in urban consumption. Indicators of
economic activity. Historically, nowcasting techniques
rural demand, viz., tractor sales, fertilisers production
have been based on simplified heuristic approaches,
and non-durable consumer goods, have exhibited
but more recently, they rely on statistical approaches
resilience. Amongst indicators of urban demand,
to produce predictions that eliminate the need for
passenger vehicles sales emerged out of contraction
informal judgement. Nowcast models can exploit
in August. The contraction in production of consumer
information from a large quantity of data series at
durables is still high. We can not say that a revival has
different frequencies and with different publication
taken place, while domestic air passenger traffic trailed
lags to extract signals from noise on economic
below pre-COVID levels. In Q2, investment remained
activity1. Methods based on social media content have
subdued, as reflected in coincident indicators – steel
also been developed to estimate hidden sentiment
consumption; cement production; and production
analysis on the 'mood' of a population. Regression-
and imports of capital goods. The record issuance based approaches, mixed data sampling, Bayesian
of corporate bonds in H1:2020, however, suggests approaches and dynamic factor models are now
financing conditions remain congenial for enabling being employed to improve the forecasting power of
traction in investment appetite. Although government nowcasting models.
1 Banbura, M., Giannone, D., Modugno, M., and Reichlin, L. (2013), “Now-casting and the real-time data flow”, European Central Bank (ECB), Working Paper
No. 1564.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
In this context, a dynamic factor model using 27 the lockdown. The recovery has been more rapid for
monthly indicators grouped2 under industry, services, industry, however, and slower for services, pointing
global and miscellaneous activities reveals that an to a two-speed recovery (Chart III.2b and c). Contact-
index of economic activity (IEA) plunged to -6.3 in intensive service sectors (retail trade; transport;
April and moderated to -2.4 in September 2020 after a hotels; restaurants; recreation) remain sluggish in the
sharp rebound in May and June with the reopening of face of continuing health risks. In contrast, the global
the economy (Chart III.2a). Sub-indices for industry, activity sub-index seems to have posted a stronger
services, global and miscellaneous activities show recovery, albeit with some tapering in July and August.
that the decline in industrial and services activity was GDP growth nowcast for Q2:2020-21 is obtained at -9.8
synchronous and of equal magnitude in the wake of per cent on a year-on-year basis (Chart III.2d).3
Chart III.2: Real-Time Activity Tracker
a: Real-Time Activity Tracker – Total b: Real-Time Activity Tracker – Components
c: Real-Time Activity Tracker – Recent Months d: GDP Nowcast Using the Activity Tracker




-5
-9.8
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
Source: RBI staff estimates.
2 INDUSTRY – index of industrial production; purchasing managers' index (PMI) manufacturing; auto sales; non-oil exports; non-oil-non-gold imports; power
supply; and tractor sales; SERVICES – air passenger; air cargo; port cargo; rail freight; fuel consumption; cement production; steel consumption; foreign
tourists; and PMI services; GLOBAL – US IIP; Baltic dry index; US PMI; Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) composite leading
indicator and US payrolls; MISCELLANEOUS – gross taxes; JobSpeak index; non-food credit; broad money; CPI non-food and crude prices.
3 In the model, GDP growth is regressed on the overall index of economic activity while correcting for serial correlation in the error by employing an
autoregressive error process.

tnecrepnihtworgy-o-Y
S e
p- 1 0
M
ar- 1 1
S e
p- 1 1
M
ar- 1 2
S e
p- 1 2
M
ar- 1 3
S e
p- 1 3
M
ar- 1 4
S e
p- 1 4
M
ar- 1 5
S e
p- 1 5
M
ar- 1 6
S e
p- 1 6
M
ar- 1 7
S e
p- 1 7
M
ar- 1 8
S e
p- 1 8
M
ar- 1 9
S e
p- 1 9
M
ar- 2 0
S e
p- 2 0
GDPActual GDPNowcast
Chapter III Demand and Output
Nowcasting exercises offer rich scope of refinement to basis that are becoming available, including through
enhance predictive efficiency by augmenting existing the application of machine learning tools, web
models with spatial and real-time indicators on a daily scraping and artificial intelligence (Box III.1).
Box III.1: Real-Time Economic Activity Index
Indicators with monthly frequency such as electricity [Vahan dashboard of Ministry of Road Transport &
consumption, industrial activity, automobile sales, cargo Highways (MoRTH), Government of India]; (ii) electricity
handling and air passenger traffic are used to monitor consumption (Power System Operation Corporation
economic activity in normal times. In a pandemic Limited); (iii) air quality index (Central Pollution Control
environment, however, monitoring economic activity in Board); and iv) Google and Apple mobility data. Y-o-Y
real time becomes critical to draw appropriate inferences growth in these indicators, standardised with the year
for nimble-footed policy decisions. In this context, 2019 as base, reflect movements in consumer demand,
coincident indices (CIs) based on high frequency data activity in trade and transportation, commercial and
have been employed by combining indicators over time
industrial activity, agricultural and domestic energy
and space (Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia4 and
demand, manufacturing activity and movements of the
Federal Bank of New York5).
labour force. The choice of states for the construction of
In the Indian context, a CI is constructed with four the CI is largely based on data availability. Accordingly,
indicators representing a mix of demand and supply data from 14 states were used, accounting for 81 per cent
dynamics and based on availability of data at daily of total national GVA. A dynamic factor model (DFM)6 is
frequency at the state level: (i) total vehicle registrations applied using the factor analyser module of Python.
Chart III.1.1: Real-Time Momentum Indicator of Economic Activity 2020: Region-wise
a: Northern Region b: Eastern Region
Source: RBI staff estimates. (contd.)
4 https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-economy/indexes/coincident
5 https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/policy/weekly-economic-index#/
6 In the DFM, the N variables (i = 1, …, N) are assumed to be the sum of two unobservable orthogonal components, viz. common factors for the set of
variables (y), and an idiosyncratic component (z) at each time period t = 1,…T. The component (y) is obtained by extracting r common factors (F), j =
it it it jt
1,…, r from all variables in the data set while the idiosyncratic component (z) covers the shocks specific to each variable. Thus, a dynamic factor model
it
can be represented as: x = λ F + ….. + λF + z
it i1 1t ir rt it
where λ for i = 1, … , N and j = 1,…, r, are factor loadings relating the data x to r latent common factors.
ij it

83keeW
83keeW
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
c: Southern Region d: Western Region
Source: RBI staff estimates.
The CI shows that all regions experienced sharp fall in the western and southern regions have experienced a fall in
cyclical component of economic activity in April before the momentum in the September after registering some
registering a slow recovery in the following months. The signs of recovery.
northern region registered positive momentum from mid-
An All-India CI, constructed as a weighted average of state
June but lost steam in the second half of August before
CIs by using the share of states in overall GVA as weights
gaining traction again in September. On the other hand,
(Chart III.1.2), captures the collapse in activity in Q1 and
a hesitant recovery in ensuing months with the gradual
opening of the economy.
Chart III.1.2: Real-Time Momentum Indicator of
Economic Activity 2020: All India References:
Crone, T. (2004), “A Redefinition of Economic Regions in
the U.S.”, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working
Paper No. 04-12.
Osborne, J. W., Costello, A. B., & Kellow, J. T. (2008), "Best
Practices in Exploratory Factor Analysis", In J. W. Osborne
(Ed.), Best Practices in Quantitative Methods, Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publishing.
Stock, J. H., & Watson, M. W. (1998, April), “Business Cycle
Fluctuations in US Macroeconomic Time Series.”, NBER
All-India CI Working Paper 6528.
III.1.1 Private Final Consumption Expenditure (PFCE) decline in nominal expenditure on private final
consumption in Q1:2020-21– it fell by a third
Private consumption, with a share of around
55 per cent in GDP, is the mainstay of aggregate to `21.7 lakh crore from its pre-COVID level of
demand. The destruction of consumption demand `32.5 lakh crore recorded in Q3:2019-20 ahead of the
by COVID-19 can be gauged from the sheer onset of the coronavirus in the world. In Q2:2020-21,

83keeW
83keeW 83keeW
Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.3: High Frequency Urban Demand Indicators
a: Urban Demand Indicators Index Seasonally Adjusted b: Urban Demand Indicators – YoY Growth
(Feb 2020=100)
Sources: Directorate General of Civil Aviation; Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM); NSO; and RBI.
there were signs of recovery in private consumption
Chart III.4: Household Credit – YoY Growth
in terms of high frequency indicators, but it is far
from gaining full and broad-based traction in the
face of rising infections as lockdowns are hesitantly
eased.
Drilling down into underlying dynamics of PFCE, it is
found that though the retrenchment occurred across
constituents, the contraction in private consumption
seems to have been more pronounced in urban areas.
Illustratively, domestic air passenger traffic and
production of consumer durables remained dormant
during the entire period of the lockdown (Chart III.3a
& b). Turning to Q2, the recovery in this segment
that became evident in May 2020 has been tepid.
Although passenger vehicles sales and production
of consumer durables have shown a better revival
Source: RBI.
relative to domestic air passenger traffic in July and
August, they still trail below pre-COVID levels. The
from June onwards (Chart III.5a and b). Rainfall in the
subdued movements in household credit in the form
current monsoon season has been 9 per cent above the
of credit card outstanding, vehicle loans and other
long period average (LPA) (till September 30), which
personal loans corroborates the muted state of urban
should augur well for the prospects of rural income and
consumption (Chart III.4).
demand. This is also reflected in accelerated growth in
Indicators of rural demand reveal a relatively better fertilisers production and progress of kharif sowing.
picture. The production of consumer non-durables and The increasing spread of COVID-19 infections into
sales of tractors, for instance, exhibited robust growth smaller towns and rural areas, however, imparts some

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart III.5: High Frequency Rural Demand Indicators
a: Rural Demand Indicators Index Seasonally Adjusted b: Rural Demand Indicators – YoY Growth
(Feb 2020=100)
Sources: Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM); NSO; and RBI.
uncertainty to the outlook, with implications for public production; and production and imports of capital
health infrastructure in these areas. A priority, goods (Chart III.6).
therefore, is to build on the government’s relief
As per the order books, inventories and capacity
package and offset reduction in remittance flows to
utilisation survey (OBICUS) of the Reserve Bank,
rural households post the exodus of migrant workers
capacity utilisation (CU) in the manufacturing sector
by actions that restore jobs and livelihood.
declined sharply to 48.2 per cent in Q1:2020-21 from
III.1.2 Gross Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF)
Investment, which was already in contraction mode
Chart III.6: Indicators of Investment Demand
since Q2:2019-20, suffered a massive knock-on effect
from the pandemic. Fixed investment shrank by 47.1
per cent in Q1:2020-21, taking its share in aggregate
demand down to 22.3 per cent from 32 per cent year
ago. In Q2, the investment climate remained subdued.
Still muted consumption demand and excess capacity
are holding back new investments, despite easing of
financial conditions. Investment in dwellings, other
buildings and structures, dropped precipitously
under the weight of a confluence of factors working
in tandem, viz., large inventory overhang in housing,
tapering of incomes and hence, EMI-servicing capacity,
and high stress in the balance sheets of non-banking
finance companies (NBFCs) and housing finance
companies (HFCs). This is also reflected in proximate
Sources: NSO; and DGCI&S, Government of India.
coincident indicators – steel consumption; cement

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.7: Capacity Utilisation in Manufacturing Chart III.8: Interest Coverage Ratio in
Manufacturing and Services Firms








Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Note: The result of Q1:2020-21 is based on 1,601 listed private manufacturing
companies and 613 listed private non-finacial services companies.
Source: RBI. Source: RBI staff estimates.
68.2 per cent in the previous quarter on a seasonally III.1.3 Government Final Consumption Expenditure
adjusted basis (Chart III.7). Manufacturing firms (GFCE)
responding to the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook
In recent years, government expenditure has counter-
survey expect domestic demand to recover gradually
cyclically supported aggregate demand as evident
from Q2:2020-21 and to sustain through Q1:2021-22.
in a growth of 16.4 per cent in government final
Meanwhile, a favourable configuration is forming to consumption expenditure (GFCE) in Q1:2020-21. In
support a revival in investment appetite. Domestic
Q2, the overall fiscal stimulus of around 10 per cent of
financial conditions have eased substantially, with
GDP to support vulnerable sections of the population
systemic liquidity in large surplus and a significant
continues to play out, providing direct and indirect
narrowing of spreads on all financial instruments,
fiscal support to the economy. Furthermore, speedier
irrespective of ratings, spurring a record issuance
implementation of the National Infrastructure
of corporate bonds in H1:2020 relative to a year
Pipeline (NIP), which involves an investment of
ago. Even though bank lending remains lacklustre,
around `111 lakh crore by 2025 in various projects
especially to large, medium and small industries, the
with participation of central government, state
mandated linking of interest rates on new floating
governments and the private sector, could boost
rate loans to external benchmarks for select sectors
overall investment spending (Chart III.9).
has improved transmission of changes in policy
rates to banks’ lending rates (Chapter IV). Among the Government finances have come under stress due to
emerging risks, a decrease in the interest coverage a sharp fall in revenues. The central government’s
ratio, indicating falling debt servicing capacity, could gross fiscal deficit (GFD) and revenue deficit (RD)
weigh on investment going forward (Chart III.8). stood at 109.3 and 121.9 per cent of BE, respectively,

tnec
reP
CU CU_SA Long-term average
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
far remaining broadly in line with budget estimates.
Chart III.9: Projected Sector-wise Expenditure
under National Infrastructure Pipeline 2020-25 This could be attributed to the curtailment of some
revenue expenditure by various state governments
[e.g., dearness allowances (DA) freeze; deferment of
part of full salary and wages; deduction of salary].
Going ahead, the contribution of government
expenditure could taper as revenue shortfalls stretch
the finances of both the central government and state
governments.
The central government’s revenue receipts were
impacted during April-August 2020 by large declines
in both direct and indirect tax collections (Table III.3)
in all categories except union excise duties which
were supported by increases in taxes on petroleum
products. The decline in customs duty collections
mirrored the ongoing contraction in imports. Total
Source: Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Government of
India.
GST collections were severely hit by the lockdown
during April-May 2020 but recovered partly during
during April-August 2020-21 (Table III.2). This has led
June-September 2020 (Chart III.10).In September GST
to some expenditure reprioritization. Accordingly,
collections were recorded at ` 95 thousand crore.
expenditure rationalisation measures have been
stipulated for the ministries during Q1-Q3 to curb During April-August 2020, the central government’s
avoidable outgoes. The central government, however, revenue expenditure received a boost from increased
sought parliament’s nod for net additional spending of agricultural, rural, and defence spending, while
`1.67 lakh crore in 2020-21. On the other hand, states’ there were lower outgoes on major subsidies (food,
expenditure has not shown any significant pick-up so fuel and fertilizers). Capital expenditure registered a
Table III.2: Budgetary Position of the Central Government during April-August 2020-21
Item (` thousand crore) (Per cent)
Budget Estimates Actuals Percent to BE Growth Rate
2019-20 2020-21 Apr-Aug Apr-Aug Apr-Aug Apr-Aug Apr-Aug Apr-Aug
2019 2020 2019 2020 2019 2020
1. Revenue Receipts 1,963 2,021 603 371 30.7 18.3 29.8 -38.6
2. Tax Revenue (Net) 1,650 1,636 405 284 24.5 17.4 10.5 -29.7
3. Non-Tax Revenue 313 385 199 86 63.4 22.4 102.0 -56.6
4. Non-Debt Capital Receipts 120 225 18 7 15.2 3.0 21.6 -63.5
5. Total Receipts (1+4) 2,083 2,246 621 377 29.8 16.8 29.6 -39.3
6. Total Expenditure (7+8) 2,786 3,042 1,175 1,248 42.2 41.0 9.8 6.2
7. Revenue Expenditure 2,448 2,630 1,039 1,113 42.5 42.3 10.7 7.1
8. Capital Expenditure 339 412 136 134 40.2 32.6 3.0 -1.3
9. Revenue Deficit (7-1) 485 609 436 743 89.9 121.9 -8.1 70.3
10. Fiscal Deficit (6-5) 704 796 554 870 78.7 109.3 -6.3 57.1
11. Gross Primary Deficit 43 88 335 633 773.4 717.9 -10.0 89.0
Source: Controller General of Accounts.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Table III.3: Central Government’s Tax Collection
Item ` thousand crore Per cent
Budget Estimates Actuals Percent to BE Growth Rate
2019-20 2020-21 Apr-Aug 2019 Apr-Aug 2020 Apr-Aug 2019 Apr-Aug 2020 Apr-Aug 2019 Apr-Aug 2020
A. Direct Taxes 1,335 1,319 281 187 21.0 14.2 9.4 -33.3
Of which
1. Corporation Tax 766 681 111 65 14.5 9.5 4.6 -41.8
2. Income Tax 556 625 166 118 29.8 18.8 13.2 -28.9
B. Indirect Taxes 1,126 1,104 380 316 33.7 28.6 0.7 -16.8
Of which
1. Total GST 666 694 240 182 36.0 26.3 1.0 -23.9
2. Custom Duties 156 138 62 32 39.8 23.4 16.5 -47.9
3. Union Excise Duties 300 267 76 100 25.3 37.6 -6.6 32.0
C. Gross Tax Revenue 2,461 2,423 661 504 26.8 20.8 4.2 -23.7
D. Assignment to States/UTs 809 784 256 218 31.6 27.8 -4.4 -14.7
E. Net Tax Revenue 1,650 1,636 405 284 24.5 17.4 10.5 -29.7
Source: Union Budget Documents and Controller General of Accounts.
road transport and highways. With the continuing
Chart III.10: Month-wise GST Collections
decline in private investment, a step-up in government

capital expenditure could perform the twin roles of

gap-fill and potential crowding-in.

Several states had presented their budgets before the

onset of the pandemic, which implies substantial
80 revisions as the year progresses. States’ own tax
70 revenue as well as central transfers have been adversely
60 impacted, while pandemic-related expenditure has
been heavy. In this context, the additional borrowings

limits for states of up to 2 per cent of gross state

domestic product (GSDP) or `4.28 lakh crore, partly

linked to specific reforms7, can expand their total
20 borrowing during 2020-21. Most states may be able to
meet the first two specified reforms (viz., one-nation-
one-ration-card and ease of doing business), which
Source: Press Information Bureau.
would allow them to borrow up to 4.0 per cent of
GDP, on an average. The central government is also
contraction of 1.3 per cent in this period (Chart III.11). working out modalities to compensate states with
Over 75 per cent of the capital expenditure was respect to the expected shortfall of compensation
incurred by the ministries of defence, railways, and cess during 2020-21.
7 It is stipulated that relaxations in borrowings limits will be partly unconditional and partly conditional to carrying out specified actions, namely 1)
universalisaton of the one-nation-one-ration card system 2) ease of doing business reforms; 3) power sector reforms 4) urban local body/ utility reform:
out of the 2 per cent increase, the first 0.5 per cent will be unconditional while the next 1 per cent will be divided into four equal tranches of 0.25 per cent
each, with each tranche linked to reform actions in above four areas. The last 0.5 per cent of the extra borrowing will be allowed to states if milestones are
completely achieved in at least three out of four reform areas.

erorcdnasuoht(cid:31)
rpA yaM nuJ luJ guA peS tcO voN ceD naJ beF raM
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
a larger proportion of their redemptions from the
Chart III.11: Revenue and Capital Expenditure
during (April-August) CSF. Given the fact that capital expenditure by states
50 accounts for two-thirds of total capital expenditure
of general government, it is imperative not to cut

down capital expenditure in the coming quarters
40 if the revival in overall economic activity has to be
supported (Chart III.12 a and b).

The limit for WMA for the centre for the first half of

2020-21 was revised upward to `2 lakh crore from `1.2
25 lakh crore. Furthermore, Center's WMA limit for
H2:2020-21 has been kept higher at `1.25 lakh crore

vis-a-vis `35,000 crore in the same period of last year.
15 Moreover, limits for foreign portfolio investment
in government securities have been expanded
and a fully accessible route has been introduced
for investment by non-residents in government
Source: Controller General of Accounts.
securities without any limit. As at end-September,
Given the stress on state finances, the Reserve Bank `7.66 Lakh crore or 63.8 per cent of the revised
increased ways and means advances (WMA) limits by gross market borrowings of the central government
60 per cent over and above the level as on March 31, for the full year 2020-21 has been completed
2020, which has been extended for a further period (Table III.4). The central government’s market
of 6 months till March 31, 2021. Rules governing borrowing calender for H2 has planned gross
withdrawals from the Consolidated Sinking Fund issuances of `4.34 Lakh crore, sticking to the
(CSF) scheme were relaxed to enable them to meet revised estimate of `12 Lakh crore for the full fiscal

EB
ottnec
reP
51-4102 61-5102 71-6102 81-7102 91-8102 02-9102 12-0202
RevenueExpenditure Capital Expenditure
Chart III.12: Capital Expenditure by States
a: Capex cut by States vis-a-vis Budgeted b: Capital Expenditure in 2019-20 (PA)







Sources: Budget Documents of State Governments, Comptroller Auditor General of India and RBI.
EBottnec
reP
hsedarP
arhdnA
hragsittahhC tarajuG anayraH dnahkrahJ akatanraK alareK hsedarP
ayhdaM
arthsarahaM rupinaM ayalahgeM maroziM dnalagaN asidO bajnuP nahtsajaR mikkiS udaN
limaT
anagnaleT arupirT hsedarP
rattU
dnahkarattU lagneB
tseW
States
Chapter III Demand and Output
Table III.4: Government Market Borrowings
(` crore)
Item 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 (up to Sep 30, 2020)
Centre States Total Centre States Total Centre States Total
Net borrowings 4,22,737 3,48,643 7,71,380 4,73,972 4,87,454 9,61,426 6,35,428 2,98,989 9,34,417
Gross borrowings 5,71,000 4,78,323 10,49,323 7,10,000 6,34,521 13,44,521 7,66,000 3,53,596 11,19,596
Sources: Government of India; and RBI staff estimates.
year. States completed gross market borrowings of by COVID-19. Disaggregated data available for July-
`3,53,596 crore during the year (up to September August 2020 suggests that among non-oil exports,
30), comprising 115.8 per cent of the calendar for the decline was pronounced in respect of gems and
H1:2020-21. jewellery, engineering goods, readymade garments
and electronic goods (Chart III.14a). On the other
III.1.4 External Demand
hand, exports of drugs and pharmaceuticals, iron
In spite of the deterioration of external demand, net
ore and rice recorded robust growth due to increased
exports contributed positively to aggregate demand in demand even during the pandemic, underlying their
Q1:2020-21, as imports contracted faster than exports innate resilience.
(Chart III.13).
The decline in imports was broad-based. During
India’s exports marked a turnaround and entered July-August, 25 out of 31 major commodity groups,
positive territory in September after six months of which accounted for 81 per cent of the import
contraction, while imports declined for the seventh basket, witnessed contraction (Chart III.14b). A steep
consecutive month (Chart III.13a). In Q2, India’s reduction in crude oil prices and lower domestic
exports were US$ 73.7 billion and imports were US$ demand for petroleum products led to a decline in
88.3 billion. Despite limited participation, India’s POL imports, while gold imports plunged with a slump
merchandise exports were impacted by the massive in domestic demand and high gold prices, although
disruption in global value chains (GVCs) inflicted a revival of investment demand for gold rekindled
Chart III.13: Growth in Merchandise and Services Trade
a: Merchandise Trade
b: Services Trade





-10
-20
-30
Sources: DGCI&S and RBI.

1Q 2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q 2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q 2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q 02-luJ
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
tnecrepnihtworgy-o-Y
Exports Imports
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart III.14: Relative Contribution to Exports and Import Growth
a: Relative Contribution: Exports Growth b: Relative Contribution: Imports Growth
Sources: DGCI&S and CPB, Netherlands.
imports in August 2020. The decline in non-POL relatively resilient with companies focusing on digital
non-gold imports in July-August 2020 was primarily workplace support, adoption of cloud services and
contributed by electronic goods, pearls, precious and infrastructure modernisation in the face of pandemic
semi-precious stones, machinery and coal, coke and challenges. Net outgo on account of investment
briquettes. and other income increased in Q1:2020-21, with an
uptick in dividend payments on foreign equity and
The merchandise trade deficit had narrowed
investment funds in India.
substantially to US$ 9.0 billion in Q1:2020-21 from
US$ 49.2 billion a year ago with the first trade surplus In the financial account, portfolio flows made
of US$ 0.8 billion after a gap of over eighteen years in a gradual rebound with the renewal of risk-on
June 2020. The trade balance, however, turned into sentiment. Net FPI inflows stood at US$ 8.3 billion in
deficit in Q2 (US$ 14.5 billion). The current account 2020-21 (up to October 6) as compared with US$ 2.8
balance, which had recorded a marginal surplus of billion a year ago. While the equity segment recorded
US$ 0.6 billion (0.1 per cent of GDP) in Q4:2019-20 inflows of US$ 11.1 billion as against outflows of US$
after a gap of twelve years, posted a record surplus of 0.6 billion a year ago, in the debt segment (general
US$ 19.8 billion (3.9 per cent of GDP) in Q1:2020-21.
route), there were outflows of US$ 4.2 billion as
Invisible receipts moderated marginally in Q1:2020- against inflows of US$ 3.4 billion a year ago. Under
21, mainly due to a decline in inward remittances on the voluntary retention route (VRR), there were net
account of the global recession, decline in crude oil inflows of US$ 1.4 billion during the same period.
prices and loss of employment opportunities overseas. Net FDI flows moderated in April-July 2020 on the
Notwithstanding the sharp decline in travel receipts back of higher repatriation relative to fresh equity
due to restrictions on tourist arrivals and a few other investments. Net ECBs to India recorded an outflow of
categories of services, net services receipts remained US$ 8.5 billion in April-August 2020 due to slowdown
relatively stable due to steady software earnings, in fresh disbursals and higher repayments, while net
which accounted for 48 per cent of total services flows under NRI deposits were higher than a year
receipts in Q1:2020-21. Despite a fall in the overall ago. As on October 02, 2020, India’s foreign exchange
global IT spending, software exports may remain reserves stood at US$ 545.6 billion, equivalent to 15.9

Chapter III Demand and Output
Table III.5: Sector-wise Growth in GVA
(y-o-y, per cent)
Sector 2018-19 2019-20 Weighted 2018-19 (FRE) 2019-20 (PE) 2020-21
(FRE) (PE) Contribution
2019-20 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 2.4 4.0 0.6 3.8 2.5 2.0 1.6 3.0 3.5 3.6 5.9 3.4
Industry 4.5 0.8 0.2 7.8 4.7 4.4 1.4 3.8 -0.2 -0.4 0.0 -33.8
Mining and quarrying -5.8 3.1 0.1 -7.3 -7.0 -4.4 -4.8 4.7 -1.1 2.2 5.2 -23.3
Manufacturing 5.7 0.0 0.0 10.7 5.6 5.2 2.1 3.0 -0.6 -0.8 -1.4 -39.3
Electricity, gas, water supply and other utilities 8.2 4.1 0.1 7.9 9.9 9.5 5.5 8.8 3.9 -0.7 4.5 -7.0
Services 7.5 5.0 3.1 7.3 7.2 7.3 8.3 5.5 6.1 4.9 3.5 -24.3
Construction 6.1 1.3 0.1 6.4 5.2 6.6 6.0 5.2 2.6 0.0 -2.2 -50.3
Trade, hotels, transport, communication 7.7 3.6 0.7 8.5 7.8 7.8 6.9 3.5 4.1 4.3 2.6 -47.0
Financial, real estate and professional services 6.8 4.6 1.0 6.0 6.5 6.5 8.7 6.0 6.0 3.3 2.4 -5.3
Public administration, defence and other services 9.4 10.0 1.3 8.8 8.9 8.1 11.6 7.7 10.9 10.9 10.1 -10.3
GVA at Basic Prices 6.0 3.9 3.9 6.9 6.1 5.6 5.6 4.8 4.3 3.5 3.0 -22.8
FRE: First Revised Estimates; PE: Provisional Estimates.
Source: NSO.
months of imports, reflecting an increase of US$ 67.8 2019-20 (growth of 2.7 per cent), driven by
billion over the level at end-March 2020. productivity growth (0.8 per cent) and increased area
under cultivation of vegetables (2.4 per cent) and
III.2 Aggregate Supply
fruits (1.6 per cent) (Table III.6).
Gross value added (GVA) at basic prices which
contracted in Q1:2020-21 (Table III.5) on a steep
Table III.6: Agriculture Production
downswing in industrial and services sectors, appears
Item Lakh tonnes Growth (%)
to have stabilised. in Q2. The first advance estimates
2018-19 2019-20 2019-20 over
of production of major kharif crops for 2020-21 placed final estimate
2018-19
foodgrains production 0.8 per cent higher than last
I. Total foodgrains 2,852.1 2,966.5 4.0
year’s level. Coincident indicators of industry and Rice 1,164.8 1,184.3 1.7
some indicators of services also suggest that the pace Wheat 1,036.0 1,075.9 3.9
Coarse cereals 430.6 474.8 10.3
of contraction is moderating in Q2.
Pulses 220.8 231.5 4.8
II. Commercial crops
III.2.1 Agriculture
Sugarcane 4,054.2 3,557.0 -12.3
Value added in agriculture and allied activities Cotton 280.4 354.9 26.6
Oilseeds 315.2 334.2 6.0
improved on the back of higher production
III. Total Horticulture Crops 3,110.5 3,195.7 2.7
of foodgrains and oilseeds. The fourth advance III.1 Total Fruits 979.7 1004.5 2.5
Banana 304.6 317.8 4.3
estimates for 2019-20 released in August 2020 placed
Citrus 134.0 140.3 4.7
foodgrains production at 2,966.5 lakh tonnes – 4.0
Mango 213.8 205.3 -4.0
per cent higher than in the previous year – driven III.2 Total Vegetables 1,831.7 1,894.6 3.4
Onion 228.2 261.5 14.6
by the rabi output (Table III.6). While rice and
Potato 501.9 486.6 -3.0
wheat achieved record production levels for the
Tomato 190.1 212.0 11.5
fourth consecutive year, coarse cereals and oilseeds III.3 Plantation Crops 165.9 160.3 -3.4
III.4 Total Spices 95.0 97.5 2.7
notched a record production level. Horticulture
III.5 Flowers and Aromatics 29.1 29.9 2.9
crops achieved production of 3,195.7 lakh tonnes in
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Government of India.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
The stock of cereals at the end of October 1, 2020 was spatial distribution, while 85 per cent of the sub-
2.2 times the buffer norms for Q3:2020-21. Minimum divisions received normal and above normal rainfall,
support prices (MSPs) announced for various crops the cumulative rainfall in North-West India remained
for the both kharif and rabi season were higher in 16 per cent below LPA (Chart III.15b). As on October
the range of 2.1 per cent to 12.7 per cent than in the 1, 2020, the live storage in major reservoirs was 87
previous year and assured a return of at least 50 per per cent of the full reservoir level (FRL), marginally
cent over the cost of production (as measured by A2 lower than previous year's level (88 per cent) but
plus FL) across all crops. higher than decadal average of of 76 per cent
(Chart III.15c).
The 2020 southwest monsoon arrived on time and
made rapid progress, covering the entire country by Spurred by the progress of precipitation, kharif
June 26, 2020, i.e., 12 days prior to the normal date. sowing also started on higher note in the month
Notwithstanding a loss of momentum in the month of June. Standing at 4.6 per cent higher than the
of July, the monsoon revived subsequently, and the full season normal area, the overall kharif acreage
cumulative southwest monsoon rainfall stood at 9 has set a new record as on September 25, 2020
per cent above the long period average (LPA) as on (Chart III.15d). Accounting for 48.9 per cent of the overall
September 30, 2020 (Chart III.15a). As regards the kharif acreage, rice and pulses sowing were higher by
Chart III.15: Progress of Rainfall and Kharif Sowing
a: Cumulative Weekly Progress of South-west Rainfall b: Sub-division-wise Comparative Rainfall Position
(June 1 to September 30) 80




-20
-40
-60
c: Reservoir Level d: Kharif Sowing Progress
Source: India Meteorological Department (IMD), Central Water Commission, and Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare, Government of India.


keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW

keeW
June July August September
)tnecreP(
APLmorfnoitaiveD
2018 2019 2020






AllIndia Northern Eastern Western Central Southern
yticapacfotnecrepsariovreseR
2019 2020 10 years average
Chapter III Demand and Output
tractor sales improved sharply in the subsequent
Chart III.16: Kharif Production (2020-21)
months (Table III.7). Farm exports recorded a
turnaround from June after experiencing contraction
in the three preceding months. The demand for
jobs under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee scheme (MGNREGA) has
surged, with a y-o-y growth of 74.2 per cent in June,
although increased employment opportunities during
the kharif sowing season and reverse migration to
cities is also underway.
Under the Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan Package, the
government has announced measures to strengthen
infrastructure logistics, capacity building, governance
and administrative reforms for agriculture, animal
husbandry, fisheries and food processing. These
measures include 8 development schemes8 with
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare, Government of India. fund allocation of `1.6 lakh crore. In addition, the
government has also legislated three important
5.6 per cent and 4.1 per cent, respectively, over the
governance and administrative reforms to attract
previous year’s level which augurs well for foodgrains
private investments to the agriculture sector and
availability. The first advance estimates of production
make it competitive, viz., amendment of the Essential
of major kharif crops for 2020-21 placed foodgrains
Commodities Act, and promulgation of the Farming
production at 1,445.2 lakh tonnes, 0.8 per cent higher
Produce Trade and Commerce (Promotion and
than last year’s level. Production of total kharif pulses
Facilitation) bill and Farmers (Empowerment and
and oil seeds is estimated to be substantially higher
Protection) Agreement on Price Assurance and Farm
than in the previous year (Chart III.16).
Services bill. These measures represent long awaited
High frequency indicators relating to the farm sector reforms in the agriculture sector, and much hinges
also reflect a strong momentum. After a dip in April, around successful implementation.
Table III.7: High Frequency Indicators for Rural Economy
(Per cent)
Items Growth Jan-20 Feb-20 Mar-20 Apr-20 May-20 Jun-20 Jul-20 Aug-20 Sep-20
Tractor sales y-o-y 4.8 21.3 -49.9 -79.4 4.0 22.4 38.5 74.7
Two wheeler sales y-o-y -16.1 -19.8 -39.8 0.0 -83.8 -38.6 -15.2 3.0
Fertliliser Sales y-o-y 48.2 13.8 -15.1 47.5 22.2 10.9 25.4 8.1
Demand for employment (MGNREGA) m-o-m 10.8 17.9 -6.6 -35.6 178.6 20.0 -28.6 -24.0 0.3
y-o-y -11.2 4.8 2.5 -37.2 48.9 74.2 73.6 66.6 71.1
Export - agri and allied sector y-o-y -5.5 1.4 -23.7 -26.4 -0.1 22.0 24.4 19.1
Agriculture credit (Outstanding) y-o-y 6.5 5.8 4.2 3.9 3.5 2.4 5.4
Stocks-cereals (ratio of actual stocks to quarterly Rice 5.4 6.6 6.5 3.3 3.1 2.9 2.8 2.2 2.4
buffer norms)
Wheat 2.2 2.0 1.8 4.8 7.5 7.4 2.0 1.7 2.1
8 Agriculture Infrastructure Fund, Promotion of Herbal Cultivation, Extension of Operation Greens to all fruits and vegetables (currently only for tomato,
onion and potato), Formalisation of Micro Food Enterprises, PM Matasya Sampada Yojana, National Animal Disease Control Programme, National Animal
Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund and Scheme on Beekeeping.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
III.2.2 Industry
Chart III.17: Weighted Contribution to
Massive supply side disruptions due to COVID-19 Industrial GVA growth
and the ensuing lockdown resulted in industrial
GVA contracting by 33.8 per cent during Q1:2020-21.
(Chart III.18a). The fall was widespread across
manufacturing and mining and quarrying activity
(Chart III.17).
The index of industrial production (IIP) shrank by
an unprecedented 35.5 per cent during Q1:2020-21.
The extent of contraction in IIP, however, moderated
in July, cushioned by electricity generation and this
was also reflected in exclusion-based measures
(Chart III.18b). On the other hand, the momentum
gained in May, weakened in June and July due to re-
imposition of lockdowns by some states (Chart III.18c).
In terms of the use-based classification, the
contraction in Q1:2020-21 was dispersed across all
Sources: NSO and RBI staff estimates.
categories (Chart III.18d).
Chart III.18: Index of Industrial Production (IIP)
a: IIP Index Seasonally Adjusted (Feb 2020=100) b: Exclusion-based IIP
c: IIP Base and Momentum d: Use-based Contribution to IIP Growth
Source: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Consumer non-durables production, however,
Chart III.20: Nominal Sales Growth in Industrial
exhibited resilience and registered growth in June-
and Services Sectors
July on the back of increase in the output of essential
goods. Consumer durables fell substantially, with
auto components, two wheelers, passenger cars,
jewellery and textiles contributing the most to
the decline. Capital goods, already on a declining
trajectory since January 2019, plunged further
during Q1:2020-21 and recorded moderation in
contraction in July 2020, with commercial vehicles
contributing highest to the decline. A silver lining,
however, was provided by agricultural machinery,
tractors, and solar power, which recorded positive
growth.
Electricity generation also contracted during
Note: The result of Q1:2020-21 is based on 1,601 listed private manufacturing
Q1:2020-21 due to shrinking demand, although the companies and 613 listed private non-finacial services companies.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
pace moderated considerably in May and June. Some
signs of recovery became evident in July-August 2020
The contraction in manufacturing GVA in Q1:2020-21
as demand improved with the easing of the lockdown.
was mirrored in sales of manufacturing companies
Hydro-electricity generation registered double-digit
(Chart III.20). Profit before taxes of manufacturing
growth in July but contraction in August. while
firms also dropped substantially (Chart III.21). Only
thermal power production remained in contraction
IT companies maintained sales growth although at a
during July-August 2020 (Chart III.19).
decelerating pace.
Chart III.19: Electricity Generation and Chart III.21: Components of Manufacturing GVA
Demand Growth
Note: The result of Q1:2020-21 is based on 1,601 listed private manufacturing
companies.
Source: Central Electricity Authority. Source: RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart III.22: PMI - India and Global
a: PMI Manufacturing b: PMI Services
Note: >50: expansion, <50: contraction.
Source: IHS Markit.
As regards the overall business environment, the Indicators of construction activity – finished
Reserve Bank’s business assessment index moved to steel consumption and cement production –
96.2 in Q2 (the 91st round of the industrial outlook bottomed out in April 2020, the month of complete
survey) from 55.3 – the lowest in the series starting shutdown, and recovered in the following months,
March 2000 after large deterioration in demand albeit still in contraction on a year-on-year basis
conditions but it remained in contraction zone. The (Chart III.23b).
business expectations index (BEI) also improved to
Commercial vehicle sales – a lead indicator of
111.4 for Q4:2020-21 from 99.5 for Q3:2020-21. The
transportation services – contracted by 84.8 per
manufacturing purchasing managers’ index (PMI)
cent in Q1:2020-21. Vehicle registrations for July
reached 56.8 in September, the highest reading since
and August, however, showed signs of sequential
January 2012, supported by accelerated increases in
improvement. Other indicators of transport segment
new orders and production (Chart III.22a). Almost
– rail freight traffic, cargo handled by major ports
one-third of manufacturers expect output growth
and air cargo – registered sequential recoveries. Rail
in the coming 12 months, as against 8 per cent that
freight posted growth for the second consecutive
foresee a contraction, resulting in the strongest degree
month in September (Table III.8). Air passenger traffic,
of overall optimism.
both domestic and international, came to an abrupt
III.2.3 Services
halt during April-May owing to restrictions on travel
In Q1:2020-21, COVID-19 brought major services and posted sluggish growth thereafter. The services
activities to a near halt and the sector contracted in PMI sequentially improved to 49.8 in September 2020,
a broad-based manner by 24.3 per cent as against albeit remained in contraction zone reflecting subdued
a growth of 5.5 per cent a year ago. Construction domestic and tepid external demand (Chart III.22b).
recorded the steepest decline (by 50.3 per cent), The rural sector showed resilience, with robust sales
followed by trade, hotels, transport, communication of tractors – a key agricultural machinery investment
and services related to broadcasting (Chart III.23a). – during May-August.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.23: Service Sector: Components and Construction Indicators
a: Service Sector Components b: Construction Indicators
Sources: Office of Economic Adviser, Joint Plant Committee, Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, Ministry of Commerce & Industry.
In Q1:2020-21, decline in private education, excluding interest payments and subsidies of
health, entertainment and recreation activity led central government, was robust in Q1:2020-21
to fall in public administration, defence and other and upto July before it tapered off in August.
(PADO) services. Growth in revenue expenditure, Supplementary demands of `1.67 lakh crore
Table III.8: Services Sector: High Frequency Indicators
(YoY Growth in Per cent)
Sr. No. Indicator Jan-20 Feb-20 Mar-20 Apr-20 May-20 Jun-20 Jul-20 Aug-20 Sep-20
1 Transport
Commercial Vehicles Sales -14.0 -32.9 -88.1 -84.8
Passenger Vehicles Sales -6.2 -7.6 -51.8 -100 -85.3 -49.6 -3.9 14.2
Two-wheeler Sales -16.1 -19.8 -39.8 -100 -83.8 -38.6 -15.2 3.0
Tractor Sales 4.8 21.3 -49.9 -79.4 4.0 22.4 38.5 74.7
Railway Freight Traffic 2.8 6.5 -13.9 -35.3 -21.3 -7.7 -4.6 3.9 15.5
Port Freight Traffic 2.2 4.6 -5.3 -21.1 -23.3 -14.6 -13.2 -10.4 -1.9
Domestic Air Passenger Traffic 1.5 9.8 -32.9 -99.9 -97.4 -83.5 -82.6 -75.8
Domestic Air Cargo Traffic 0.8 1.7 -32.6 -92.8 -82.9 -48.0 -41.4 -36.0
International Air Passenger Traffic 0.2 -3.4 -56.2 -99.1 -98.0 -93.0 -90.4 -89.7
International Air Freight Traffic -2.9 -3.1 -31.7 -77.0 -58.2 -35.7 -30.1 -24.9
2 Communications
Telephone Subscribers Base -2.2 -2.0 -0.5 -1.2 -1.6 -2.2
Mobile/Wireless -2.2 -2.0 -0.4 -1.1 -1.6 -2.1
3 Construction
Cement Production 5.1 7.8 -25.1 -85.2 -21.4 -6.8 -13.5 -14.6
Steel Consumption 4.1 -6.5 -29.2 -85.5 -48.3 -28.3 -11.7 -16.5 -5.7
4 Financial services
Non-food Credit 8.5 7.3 6.7 7.3 6.8 6.0 5.4 5.5 5.3
Aggregate Deposits 9.9 9.0 7.9 9.9 10.6 11.0 11.1 10.9 10.5
5 Public Administration & Defence
Revenue Expenditure* -7.0 14.3 69.8 53.4 -26.4 97.7 24.4 -26.6
*: excluding Interest payments and Subsidies.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart III.24: Housing Sector- Launches, Sales and Prices
a: Housing Activity in India b: Housing Price Index
Source: PropTiger and RBI staff estimates.
by the central government will support GVA in III.3. Conclusion
PADO during Q2. GVA in financial, real estate and
Available information suggests a gradual recovery is
professional services fell in Q1:2020-21 due to weak
under way with the re-opening of the economy. While
performance of information technology companies
the rising number of COVID-19 infections continues to
after closing down of businesses in travel, tourism
weigh on the near-term outlook, private consumption
and hotel industries due to the pandemic. Real estate
may recover faster than other components of
companies also suffered due to subdued sales growth.
aggregate demand with a boost from rural demand
In financial services, bank credit growth decelerated
on the back of bright agricultural prospects. Private
while deposits growth marginally improved during
investment may, however, take longer to stabilize,
May-September.
hamstrung by low capacity utilisation, still subdued
In residential real estate, both sales and new bank credit and the global recession. The prospects
launches contracted in Q1:2020-21, primarily due for the industrial sector hinge around the response
to the lockdown and sluggish consumer sentiment, to the government’s initiatives, including Make
leading to rise in inventory overhang (Chart III.24a). in India. The gamechanger would be public capital
The all-India housing price index of RBI decelerated spending, given its high multiplier effect. An early
in Q1:2020-21. The sub-indices for Delhi contracted containment of the pandemic should also speed
substantially from the previous quarter while up the revival. The outlook for the services sector
that for Bengaluru registered a substantial growth also improved with activity gaining some momentum
(Chart III.24b). in Q2.

IV. Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
During H1:2020-21, domestic financial markets returned to normalcy with a recovery in trading volumes,
narrowing of spreads and rebounds in financial asset prices. Equity markets recovered strongly from panic sell-offs
in March tracking global movements. The Indian rupee (INR) appreciated vis-à-vis the US dollar with the return
of investor appetite for EME assets. In the credit market, transmission has improved considerably relative to the
historical experience. Going forward, liquidity conditions would continue to be calibrated, consistent with the stance
of monetary policy while ensuring normalcy in the functioning of financial markets and institutions and conducive
financial conditions.
In Q2:2020-21, global financial markets have IV.1 Domestic Financial Markets
stabilised after recovering from the tailspin during
During H1:2020-21, domestic financial markets
February and March 2020. In more recent weeks,
returned to normalcy with a recovery in trading
sentiments have been intermittently dampened
volumes, narrowing of spreads and rebounds in
by rising infections and geo-political tensions or
financial asset prices after a near collapse in market
lifted by news on the progress on the vaccine. In
activity, post the imposition of the nation-wide
large measure, the calm in financial markets after
lockdown to combat COVID-19. A slew of monetary,
the turbulence in March has been engendered by liquidity, credit easing and regulatory measures by
liquidity infusions, monetary policy actions by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the government’s
central banks and stimulus measures undertaken stimulus package enthused market sentiment.
by national governments. Equity markets in major Nevertheless, concerns about the duration of the
advanced economies (AEs) and emerging market pandemic, the large expansion in market borrowings
economies (EMEs) have registered handsome gains by the public sector, border tensions and rising
with the return of risk-on sentiments. Gold prices inflation prints intermittently kept markets on edge.
surged to record highs in early August, but have been
In money and bond markets, spreads compressed to
range-bound more recently. Bond yields softened
below pre-COVID levels, spurring record corporate
and spreads narrowed in the wake of substantial
bond issuances. Equity markets recovered strongly
unconventional liquidity operations and strong
from panic sell-offs in March tracking global
demand for safe assets; relative to other segments,
movements. The Indian rupee (INR) initially came
however, bond markets have moved sideways and in
under pressure with the spread of the pandemic, but
a narrow range. In currency markets, the US dollar
has subsequently appreciated vis-à-vis the US dollar
depreciated markedly as fatalities increased amid with the return of investor appetite for EME assets.
rising infection numbers and with signals from In the credit market, transmission has improved
the US Federal Reserve (FED) that monetary policy considerably relative to the historical experience,
would continue to remain accommodative for a long facilitated by large policy rate cuts, persisting
period, reinforced by an average inflation targeting abundance of liquidity and the introduction of the
framework allowing transitory target overshoot external benchmark system for the pricing of loans
to support maximum employment. Most EME in select sectors. Bank credit growth has, however,
currencies have appreciated against a weakening remained tepid.
dollar and the return of capital flows after a hiatus.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
IV.1.1 Money Market
Chart IV.2: Share of Traded/Reported
Deals in Call Money Market
Money markets have remained broadly stable during
H1:2020-21 due to proactive liquidity management by
the Reserve Bank. In the overnight uncollateralised
segment, the weighted average call rate (WACR) – the
operating target of monetary policy – remained within
the policy corridor although it traded with a distinct
downward bias, reflecting the comfortable liquidity
and financing conditions (Chart IV.1).
In the call money segment, the weighted average rate
on traded deals persisted above rates on reported
deals.1 The share of reported deals increased to 57 per
cent in May 2020 from 49 per cent in the previous
month due to increase in lending activity by co-
operative banks whose share increased to 68 per cent Sources: Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL); RBI.
in May (Chart IV.2). The increasing share of reported
deals also contributed to pulling down the WACR The secured segments (triparty repo and market
closer to the reverse repo rate in May 2020. The share repo) remained dominant in overnight money market
of reported deals moderated in September (41 per activity in H1:2020-21, with a share of more than 95 per
cent) in tandem with reduced lending (58 per cent) by cent in total volumes (Chart IV.3). Within the secured
co-operative banks. segment, market repos gained in turnover, reflecting
Chart IV.1: Policy Corridor and WACR
Chart IV.3: Share in Overnight
6.00 Money Market Volumes
5.75
5.50
5.25
5.00
4.75
4.50
4.25
4.00
3.75
3.50
3.25
3.00
Source: Reserve Bank of India (RBI).
Sources: CCIL; RBI.
1 ‘Traded deals’ are made directly on the negotiated dealing system (NDS)-Call platform whereas ‘reported deals’ are over-the-counter (OTC) transactions
and reported on the NDS-Call platform after the deals are negotiated.

tnec
reP
WACR Repo Reverse repo MSF
91-tcO-10 91-tcO-51 91-voN-21 91-ceD-01 02-naJ-70 02-beF-40 02-raM-30 02-raM-71 02-rpA-41 02-yaM-21 02-nuJ-90 02-luJ-70 02-guA-40 02-peS-10 02-peS-03
Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
(i) increase in participant base and (ii) increased
Chart IV.4: Money Market Rates
lending by mutual funds. The shares of borrowings

by public sector banks in both the triparty repo and 12

market repo segments moderated in H1, while private

sector banks increased their share of borrowings in 9

the triparty repo segment. 7

Interest rates in the secured overnight segments traded 5

below the reverse repo rate in H1 reflecting the surplus

system liquidity conditions and increased lending 2

by mutual funds. As a result, the spread between 0
the collateralised rates and the uncollateralised rate
(WACR) widened (Chart IV.4): the triparty repo rate
and the market repo rate traded below the WACR
by 59 basis points (bps) and 58 bps, respectively, in
H1:2020-21 as against 36 bps and 37 bps, respectively,
Sources: RBI; CCIL: F-TRAC; CCIL: FBIL; and RBI staff estimates.
in H2:2019-20.
Interest rates on money market instruments such crore in the corresponding period of H1:2019-20 in
as certificates of deposit (CDs), commercial papers view of surplus liquidity and muted credit demand.
(CPs) and Treasury Bills (T-bills) of 3-month maturity Aggregate CP issuances declined to `7.9 lakh crore
softened by 156 bps, 155 bps and 97 bps, respectively, during H1:2020-21 from `11.9 lakh crore during
in H1:2020-21, reflecting the policy rate cuts and H1:2019-20 (Chart IV.5a), although corporates took
liquidity augmenting measures. Fresh issuance of CDs advantage of lower interest rates and increased their
by banks moderated to `45,165 crore during H1:2020- share. The share of non-banking financial companies
21 (up to September 11, 2020) from around `1.75 lakh (NBFCs) in CP issuances, which was low at the
Chart IV.5: Primary Issuances of Commercial Paper
a: Systemic Liquidity, Issuances and WADR b: Institutional Break-up
Source: RBI; CCIL: F-TRAC; and RBI staff estimates.

tnec
reP
WACR Triparty repo Market repo
3-month CP 3-month CD 91-dayT-bill
91-rpA-10 91-yaM-31 91-nuJ-42 91-guA-50 91-peS-61 91-tcO-82 91-ceD-90 02-naJ-02 02-raM-20 02-rpA-31 02-yaM-52 02-luJ-60 02-guA-71 02-peS-03
6,00,000 8.5
8.04
5,00,000
7.5
4,00,000
3,00,000 6.5
2,00,000
1,00,000 5.5

4.22 4.5
-1,00,000
-2,00,000 3.79 3.5
erorc(cid:31) tnec
reP
Average daily liquiditydeficit(-) /surplus (+)
Issuance WADR (RHS)
91-rpA 91-yaM 91-nuJ 91-luJ 91-guA 91-peS 91-tcO 91-voN 91-ceD 02-naJ 02-beF 02-raM 02-rpA 02-yaM 02-nuJ 02-luJ 02-guA 02-peS
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
beginning of H1, increased sharply in September 2020
Chart IV.6: 10-year Generic Yield, Repo Rate and
in response to the measures taken by the Government Liquidity Conditions
to provide liquidity support to the non-bank lenders
through the special liquidity scheme and partial credit 7.00 7,00,000
guarantee scheme. The share of government owned 6.50 6,00,000
NBFCs, however, declined in September 2020 as they 6.00 5,00,000
preferred longer-term borrowings (Chart IV.5b). 5.50 4,00,000
5.00 3,00,000
IV.1.2 Government Securities (G-sec) Market
4.50 2,00,000
During H1:2020-21, yields on government bonds 4.00 1,00,000
moderated, with the 10-year paper softening by 3.50 0
29 bps in response to the slew of conventional and
unconventional measures taken by the Reserve
Bank to enhance systemic liquidity and compress
term spreads. These measures headed off persistent
upward pressures on yields from the higher supply Sources: RBI; and Bloomberg.
of paper.
In Q2:2020-21, yields exhibited a hardening bias on a
The hardening of yields at the beginning of
rise in fuel prices and higher inflation prints for June
Q1:2020-21 was mitigated by liquidity augmenting
and July. The Reserve Bank conducted five operation
measures announced in the second half of April
twist auctions during July-September and backed
and May (Section IV.3 provides details).2 With the
them up with an increase in the limit of SLR securities
announcement of an enhancement of Central
kept under the held to maturity (HTM) category by
Government market borrowings by about 54 per
2.5 per cent of NDTL – from 19.5 per cent to 22 per
cent – from `7.8 lakh crore to `12.0 lakh crore – for
cent. Overall, the 10-year yield (5.79 per cent GS 2030)
2020-21, however, the benchmark yield rose by 20
hardened by 12 bps in Q2, mainly reflecting a 24 bps
bps on May 11, 2020. In June, several factors viz., low
rise in August.
demand for dated securities; border tensions; rating
Trade in Dated Securities
downgrade by Fitch Ratings; and supply fatigue from
increased issuances of T-bills and state development Owing to the near cessation of market activity after
loans (SDL) kept yields firm. Subsequently, however, the imposition of the nation-wide lockdown, the
softening US treasury yields, fall in crude oil futures, growth of average trading volume in G-sec segment
and the announcement of special open market was 32.3 per cent lower during H1:2020-21 than a year
operations (OMOs) or “Operation Twist”, eased ago (Chart IV.7a). In contrast, the growth of average
pressure on yields by end-June (Chart IV.6). Overall, trading volume in T-bills (including cash management
the 10-year benchmark yield softened by 15 bps in bills) was 62.3 per cent higher, reflecting the market
Q1:2020-21. preference for securities of shorter tenor to minimise
duration risk amidst the uncertainty caused by the
pandemic (Chart IV.7b).
2 In the first week of May, yields also eased tracking the lower cut-off in auction for a new 10-year security.

tnec
reP
erorc(cid:31)
Netliquidity position surplus (+)/ deficit(-) (RHS)
10-yearyield Reporate
02-rpA-3 02-rpA-32 02-yaM-31 02-nuJ-2 02-nuJ-22 02-luJ-21 02-guA-1 02-guA-12 02-peS-01 02-peS-03
Large supply of
papers, lockdown
effect and thin Fall in crude Higher inflation
volume of trade prices, US treasury print and rise
yields and repo in crude oil
rate cut prices
Announcement
of Special
OMO Hike
in excise Special OMOs
duty
Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.7: Trading Volumes and Yield
a: G-secs b: T-bills
12,00,000 7.0
6.8
10,00,000 6.6
8,00,000 6.4
6.2
6,00,000
6.0
4,00,000 5.8
5.6 2,00,000
5.4
0 5.2
H1:2019-20 H1:2020-21
Sources: CCIL; and RBI staff estimates.
The yield curve responded to policy measures as well FPI Investment in G-Sec
as to evolving global/domestic developments during
After the outbreak of the pandemic, foreign portfolio
H1:2020-21, as reflected in shifts in latent factors
investors (FPIs) turned net sellers in both the equity
viz., level and slope (Chart IV.8a).3 The average level
and the debt segments in April 2020. With receding
softened by 15 bps in H1 while the slope of the yield
uncertainty and improvement in market sentiment,
curve steepened considerably (76 bps), the latter
FPIs turned net buyers in the equity markets beginning
reflecting the softening of rates at the shorter-end due
in May. In the debt segment, however, they largely
to monetary easing and persistent pressures at the
remained net sellers during May and July owing to
longer end from apprehensions of higher supply of
India’s outlook downgrade by Fitch and Moody’s
papers in that segment (Chart IV.8b).
Chart IV.8: G-Sec Yield Curve
a: Shifts b: Changes in Level and Slope
Sources: FBIL; and RBI staff estimates.
3 While the level is the average of all yields across maturities, the slope is given by the difference in yield between the longest and the shortest maturity
(term spread).

erorc(cid:31) tnec
reP
2,00,000 7.5
1,80,000 7.0
1,60,000 6.5
1,40,000
6.0
1,20,000 5.5
1,00,000
5.0
80,000
4.5
60,000
40,000 4.0
20,000 3.5
0 3.0
H1:2019-20 H1:2020-21
Volume
Weighted average yield of traded maturities (RHS)
erorc(cid:31) tnec
reP
Volume
Weighted average yield of traded maturities (RHS)
8.00
7.50
7.00 7 6 .0 .8 2 1
6.74 6.50 6.476 6 . . 6 7 7 4
6.00
5.50
5.00
4.50
4.00
3.50
3.00
)tnec
reP(dleiY
52.0 00.2 57.3 05.5 52.7 00.9 57.01 05.21 52.41 00.61 57.71 05.91 52.12 00.32 57.42 05.62 52.82 00.03 57.13 05.33 52.53 00.73 57.83 05.04

80 76
60 55
40 32 2632
20 10

-2 -4
-20 -17 -15
-40 -31 -39
-60
Maturityinyears March 27- April 17- May 22- Aug06- Aug31- Cumulative
April 16 May 21 Aug05 Aug30 Sep 30 (March 27-
March 27,2020 April 17, 2020 May 22, 2020 Sep 30)
August 6, 2020 August 31, 2020 Sep 30,2020
stniopsisaB
Level Slope
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart IV.9: FPI Investment in Equity and Debt Chart IV.10: FBIL -T-Bill Benchmark
(Yield to Maturity)
4.90
4.60
4.30
4.00
3.70
3.40
3.10
2.80
2.50
Source: National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL). Source: FBIL.
and escalation of trade tension between the US and State Development Loans
China. Measures to infuse additional liquidity globally
The weighted average spread of cut-off yields on
and favourable domestic and international factors
state development loans (SDLs) over the G-sec yield
turned FPIs into net buyers in the equity segment
of corresponding maturity at 53 bps during H1:2020-
(May-August) and in the debt segment during August.
21 was marginally higher by 1 bps on a year-on-year
Renewed concerns about domestic growth prospects,
basis (Chart IV.11). The average inter-state spread on
coupled with weak global cues, turned FPIs into net
securities of 10-year maturity (fresh issuance) was
sellers in the equity segment as against net buyers in
higher at 9 bps in H1:2020-21 (4 bps in H1:2019-20).
the debt segment in September (Chart IV.9).
In order to enable states/UTs to counter the pandemic-
Treasury Bills related stress on their finances, the ways and means
advances (WMA) limit for State Governments was
After a 75 bps policy rate cut and the announcement
increased by 60 per cent in two stages (April 1 and
of liquidity augmenting measures on March 27, 2020,
April 17). The number of days for which a state/UT
yields on T-bills softened sharply, dipping below
can be in overdraft was also increased, effective April
the reverse repo rate (Chart IV.10). In the face of
7, 2020.
pandemic-induced uncertainty, the demand for short-
Switching of Securities
term and liquid securities increased significantly.
Accordingly, the Reserve Bank in consultation with In order to facilitate debt consolidation, the Reserve
the GoI increased the issuance limit of T-bills from Bank conducted five switch operations on behalf of
`25,000 crore per week to `45,000 crore per week the government amounting to `76,047 crore during
for the quarter ending June. This was subsequently H1:2020-21. Reflecting these operations, the weighted
reduced to `35,000 crore per week in Q2:2020-21. average maturity (WAM) of outstanding stock of G-secs

tnec
reP
syaD

syaD

htnoM

shtnoM

shtnoM

shtnoM

shtnoM

shtnoM

shtnoM

shtnoM

shtnoM

shtnoM

shtnoM

shtnoM

4.8
4.0
3.65
3.55
3.45
3.42
Tenor
March 27, 2020 April17, 2020
May22,2020 August06, 2020
August31, 2020 Sep 30,2020
Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
H1:2020-21 with decadal low yields, record primary
Chart IV.11: SDLs - Amount Raised and Spread
market issuances and increased secondary market
35,000 150
turnover. During H1:2020-21, yields on AAA-rated
30,000 125 3-year bonds issued by NBFCs; corporates; and public
25,000 sector undertakings (PSUs), financial institutions

20,000 (FIs) and banks moderated significantly – by 157

15,000 bps, 170 bps and 114 bps, respectively – aided by
50 surplus liquidity conditions, targeted long-term repo
10,000
5,000 25 operations (TLTROs) and “operation twist” auctions
(Chart IV.12a). The fall in yields (of similar maturity)
0 0
was also evident across issuer categories and credit
ratings (Chart IV.12b).
Resource mobilisation through issuances of corporate
bonds in the primary market at `3.2 lakh crore during
H1:2020-21 (up to August 2020) was higher by 23.5 per
Source: RBI.
cent than `2.6 lakh crore during the corresponding
increased to 10.97 years as at end-September from
period of the previous year (Chart IV.13a). Almost
10.54 years at end-March 2020. As at end -September,
the entire resource mobilisation in the corporate
the weighted average coupon (WAC) at 7.44 per cent bond market (99.7 per cent) was through the private
was lower than 7.69 per cent at end-March 2020. placement route. Outstanding investments by FPIs in
corporate bonds declined to `1.5 lakh crore at end-
IV.1.3 Corporate Bond Market
September 2020 from `1.7 lakh crore at end-March
The corporate bond market, which experienced severe 2020. Consequently, FPIs’ utilisation of the approved
stress during March-April 2020 after the outbreak limit for investment in corporate bonds declined to
of COVID-19, regained normalcy during the rest of 33.8 per cent at end-September 2020 from 54.5 per
Chart IV.12: Corporate Bond Yields (3-years maturity)
a: AAA Bonds b: Lower Rated Bonds
Sources: Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA).

erorc(cid:31)
stniop
sisaB
Totalaccepted amount
Cumulative weighted average spread (RHS)
02-rpA-70 02-rpA-12 02-yaM-50 02-yaM-91 02-nuJ-20 02-nuJ-61 02-nuJ-03 02-luJ-41 02-luJ-82 02-guA-11 02-guA-52 02-peS-80 02-peS-92
9.0
8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
tnec
reP
91-tcO-10 91-tcO-71 91-voN-40 91-voN-91 91-ceD-30 91-ceD-71 02-naJ-10 02-naJ-51 02-naJ-92 02-beF-21 02-beF-82 02-raM-61 02-raM-13 02-rpA-12 02-yaM-60 02-yaM-12 02-nuJ-50 02-nuJ-91 02-luJ-30 02-luJ-71 02-luJ-13 02-guA-41 02-guA-82 02-peS-11 02-peS-03
13.5
12.5
11.5
10.5
9.5
8.5
7.5
6.5
5.5
NBFCs Corporates PSUs,FIs & Banks
tnec
reP
91-tcO-10 91-tcO-51 91-tcO-92 91-voN-21 91-voN-62 91-ceD-01 91-ceD-42 02-naJ-70 02-naJ-12 02-beF-40 02-beF-81 02-raM-30 02-raM-71 02-raM-13 02-rpA-41 02-rpA-82 02-yaM-21 02-yaM-62 02-nuJ-90 02-nuJ-32 02-luJ-70 02-luJ-12 02-guA-40 02-guA-81 02-peS-10 02-peS-51 02-peS-03
AA-NBFCs AA-Corporates
BBB (minus)-NBFCs BBB (minus)-Corporates
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart IV.13: Corporate Bond Market Activity
a: Primary Market Issuances b: Secondary Market Turnover - Daily Average
90,000
80,000
70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000

Source: SEBI.
cent at end-March 2020. The daily average secondary thereafter (Chart IV.14a). The spread on 3-month CPs
market trading volume in the corporate bond market (over 91-day T Bills) reduced from 170 bps on March
increased by 8.9 per cent to `8,985 crore during 26, 2020 to 105 bps by September 30, 2020 while that
H1:2020-21 over the corresponding period of the on AAA-rated 3-year bonds (over 3-year G-sec) issued
previous year (Chart IV.13b), boosted by the regulatory by corporates fell from 276 bps to 43 bps during the
requirement of investing a part of TLTRO funds in the same period (Chart IV.14b).
secondary market.
Over the same period, the spreads on lower rated
Following the outbreak of the pandemic, global corporate bonds also moderated significantly: by
spillover effects resulted in a significant tightening of 223 bps for AA-rated 3-year bonds and by 140 bps
domestic financial conditions, which peaked between on BBB- (BBB minus) rated 3-year bonds – the lowest
end-March and mid-April but moderated gradually rated investment grade bonds (Table IV.1). The market
Chart IV.14: Financial Conditions, Systemic Liquidity and Spreads
a: Financial Conditions in 2020 b: Surplus Liquidity and Risk Premium
(spread over repo rate)
Sources: FIMMDA; RBI and Bloomberg.

erorc`
91-rpA 02-yaM 91-nuJ 91-luJ 02-guA 91-peS 91-tcO 02-voN 91-ceD 02-naJ 02-beF 02-raM 02-rpA 02-yaM 02-nuJ 02-luJ 02-guA
15,000
13,500
12,000
10,500
9,000
7,500
6,000
4,500
3,000
1,500

erorc`
91-raM 91-rpA 91-yaM 91-nuJ 91-luJ 91-guA 91-peS 91-tcO 91-voN 91-ceD 02-naJ 02-beF 02-raM 02-rpA 02-yaM 02-nuJ 02-luJ 02-guA 02-peS
800 7,00,000
700 6,00,000

5,00,000

4,00,000

3,00,000

2,00,000

100 1,00,000
0 0
stniopsisaB
91-tcO-1 91-tcO-92 91-voN-62 91-ceD-42 02-naJ-12 02-beF-81 02-raM-71 02-rpA-41 02-yaM-21 02-nuJ-9 02-luJ-7 02-guA-4 02-peS-1 02-peS-03
erorc(cid:31)
Net surplusliquidity (RHS) CPs
AAA AA BBB-
Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Table IV.1: Financial Markets - Rates and Spread
Interest Rates (per cent) Spread in bps (over corresponding risk-free rate)
Instrument As on As on Variation As on As on Variation
March 26, 2020 September 30, 2020 (in bps) March 26, 2020 September 30, 2020 (in bps)
(1) (2) (3) (4 = 3-2) (5) (6) (7 = 6-5)
CP (3-month) 6.74 4.32 -242 170 105 -65
Corporate Bonds#
(i) AAA (1-yr) 7.76 4.35 -341 246 47 -199
(ii) AAA (3-yr) 8.47 5.35 -312 276 43 -233
(iii) AAA (5-yr) 7.84 6.10 -174 141 50 -91
(iv) AA (3-yr) 9.15 6.13 -302 344 121 -223
(v) BBB-minus (3-yr) 12.29 10.10 -219 658 518 -140
10-yr G-sec 6.22 6.01 -21 - - -
#: Issued by Corporates.
Sources: CCIL: F-TRAC; FIMMDA; and Bloomberg.
perception of credit risk also eased with the gradual Summing up, the measures undertaken by the Reserve
unlocking of the economy: State Bank of India’s and Bank and the Government have restored stability in
ICICI Bank’s 3-year credit default swap (CDS) spreads financial markets and institutions. Fears of illiquidity,
reduced by 77 bps and 85 bps, respectively, during which froze market activity across various segments,
H1:2020-21. have been dispelled as reflected in softening of yields
and narrowing of spreads across money and bond
market instruments (Box IV.1).
Box IV.1: Unconventional Monetary Policy Measures: Impact on Bond Market
Various measures undertaken by the Reserve Bank to
Chart IV.1.1: LTRO and TLTRO Auctions
augment system-level and targeted liquidity produced
differential responses in terms of varying intensity of
appetite for funds as reflected in the bid-cover ratio
(Chart IV.1.1).
The announcement effects of LTROs and TLTROs on the
benchmark 10-year G-sec yield is examined over a 3-hour
period (windows of 15 minutes interval) prior to and after
the announcement. Based on the two-sample Wilcoxon
rank-sum (Mann-Whitney) tests, six out of the eight
announcements had a statistically significant downward
impact on yields prior to and post announcement of Source: RBI.
auctions (Table IV.1.1).4
Table IV.1.1: Difference in G-Sec Yields Pre- and Post-Announcement of Auctions – Tests of Significance
Announcement Dates LTROs TLTROs
Feb,07 Feb,25 Mar,16 Mar,27 Mar,30 Apr,03 Apr,15 Apr,17
z-stat 4.157 0.693 -3.637 2.744 4.157 -4.157 3.465 4.157
Probability that post-announcement yield is lower than pre-announcement 1.000 0.583 0.063 0.830 1.000 0.000 0.917 1.000
(contd.)
4 Although there were ten auctions of LTROs and TLTROs in all, there were eight announcements for these auctions, as two auctions (February 17 and 24)
were announced on February 7 and another two auctions (March 2 and 9) on February 25, 2020.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
For the six announcements for which the decline in viz., changes in the policy repo rate, and changes in the US
yields was statistically significant, the duration and economic policy uncertainty5 (as a proxy for factors such
magnitude of the announcement effect on intra-day as international oil prices and yield movements), with the
yields can be examined by the average difference in following specifications:
yields at intervals of 15 minutes post-announcement
from that of the average yield an hour prior to the
(1);
auction announcement. The maximum average impact
is found fifteen minutes after the announcement with a
moderation of about 4 bps in yields from the average of (2)
the hour before announcement (Chart IV.1.2). An hour
The estimates indicate that the LTRO and TLTRO auctions
after the announcement, the moderation in yields turns
softened yields on 10-year G-secs and on 10-year corporate
statistically insignificant.
bonds by around 29 bps and 47 bps, respectively (Table
In order to explore the impact of the actual auction IV.1.2)6. The reduction in the policy rate (from 5.15 per
outcome on yields and their persistence in an event study cent to 4.0 per cent over the sample period) is estimated
framework (Hartley and Rebucci, 2020), an autoregressive to have softened G-sec and corporate bond yields by
(AR) model is estimated, based on data spanning December
another 8-9 bps. Overall, the measures undertaken by
2019-August 2020, for daily changes in 10-year bond yields
the Reserve Bank had a sobering impact on yields and
(G-sec as well as corporate bonds separately) regressed
risk spreads, which helped in easing market stress and
on LTRO and TLTRO auction dates (as dummies) with
softening financing conditions.
controls for other key variables that can impact yields,
Table IV.1.2: UMP Impact on Bond Yields
Chart IV.1.2 Average Decline in
Variables ΔG-sec ΔCorporate
Yields Post-Announcement of Auctions bond
ΣLag (-1 to -2) -0.067 0.025
ΔPolicy rate 0.082*** 0.069***
ΔUS policy uncertainty (-1) 0.00006 0.0003
ΣLTRO -0.0566* -0.227***
ΣTLTRO -0.238*** -0.242***
ΣLTRO + ΣTLTRO -0.294*** -0.470***
Diagnostic tests (p-values)
BG LM test for the null of no autocorrelation of 0.325 0.192
residuals
Time periods (interval of 15 minutes) ARCH LM test for conditional heteroscedasticity 0.310 0.923
Note: Deeper, moderate and lighter shades indicate that median difference is Notes: *,**, ***: Denote 10, 5 and 1 per cent level of significance,
significantly different from zero at 5 per cent level, 20 per cent and 30 per cent respectively;
level of significance, respectively, using Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Source: RBI staff estimates.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
Reference:
Hartley, J. S. and A. Rebucci (2020), “An Event Study of COVID-19 Central Bank Quantitative Easing in Advanced and
Emerging Economies”, NBER Working Paper No. 27339, June.
5 Baker, S. R. Bloom, N. and S. J. Davis (2016), “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 131:4, pp. 1593-1636;
Data source: US Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis website.
6 TLTRO2 is not considered as the auction date of April 3, 2020 coincided with (i) the announcement of TLTRO3; (ii) change of market timing by RBI; and
(iii) announcement of large borrowing programme for H1:2020-21.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
IV.1.4 Equity Market dismal quarterly earnings results of corporates;
and (iii) extension of lockdown till end-May. The
After undergoing intense volatility in Q4:2019-20
announcement of the `20 lakh crore “Atmanirbhar
following the COVID-19 outbreak with a massive
Bharat” stimulus package by the Government and a
disruption in business activity, the Indian equity
large policy repo rate cut by the Reserve Bank on May
market made a strong V-shaped recovery in H1:2020-
22 boosted investor sentiment. The market rebounded
21. The BSE Sensex gained 46.5 per cent in H1:2020-21
after hitting a low of 25981 on March 23, 2020 (Chart in June 2020 with the BSE Sensex posting its best
IV.15a). Strong rallies in global equity markets on the quarterly return (18.5 per cent) since 2009. Border
back of massive fiscal and monetary stimuli in major tensions and downward revision in India’s GDP
countries and the measures undertaken in India growth projections for 2020-21 by various agencies
boosted domestic market sentiments. capped the upside in equities.
In Q1:2020-21, the equity market had posted its biggest The recovery continued in July and August on the
monthly gain in 11 years in April 2020, with the BSE back of positive news from encouraging trials of the
Sensex increasing by 14.4 per cent. In the later part coronavirus vaccine and hopes of more supportive
of April, the closure of six debt fund schemes by a measures by national authorities globally. On
mutual fund weighed adversely on domestic market the domestic front, the rally in equities was also
sentiment. This was quickly reversed, however, supported by improvement in the manufacturing
following the Reserve Bank’s announcement of PMI for June 2020, reports of disengagement between
liquidity augmenting measures, including the special India and China over border issues and better than
liquidity facility for mutual funds (SLF-MF) on April
expected Q1:2020-21 corporate earnings results.
27, 2020.
Domestic market sentiment was tempered during
Bearish sentiments gripped the stock market in early August by contraction in manufacturing PMI and
May, with the Sensex declining by 2002 points (5.9 higher-than-expected CPI inflation print for July 2020.
per cent) on May 4 in sync with global peers amidst The stock market plummeted sharply in the last
(i) escalating tensions between US and China; (ii) trading session of the month due to fresh escalation
Chart IV.15: Stock Market Indices and Investment
a: BSE Sensex and Dow Jones Industrial Average b: Net Investment in Equity by Institutional Investors
40000 31000
38000 29000





23000 30000
28000 21000
26000 19000
BSE Sensex DowJones(RHS)
Sources: Bloomberg; NSDL; and SEBI.

02-rpA-10 02-rpA-8 02-rpA-51 02-rpA-22 02-rpA-92 02-yaM-60 02-yaM-31 02-yaM-02 02-yaM-72 02-nuJ-30 02-nuJ-01 02-nuJ-71 02-nuJ-42 02-luJ-10 02-luJ-80 02-luJ-51 02-luJ-22 02-luJ-92 02-guA-50 02-guA-21 02-guA-91 02-guA-62 02-peS-20 02-peS-90 02-peS-61 02-peS-32 02-peS-03
45,000
35,000
25,000
15,000
5,000
-5,000
-15,000
-25,000
-35,000
-45,000
-55,000
-65,000
erorc(cid:31)
91-raM 91-rpA 91-yaM 91-nuJ 91-luJ 91-guA 91-peS 91-tcO 91-voN 91-ceD 02-naJ 02-beF 02-raM 02-rpA 02-yaM 02-nuJ 02-luJ 02-guA 02-peS
Foreign portfolio investors Mutualfunds
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
in Indo-China border tensions and witnessed cautious (Chart IV.15b). Resource mobilisation through public
trading ahead of the implementation of new trading and rights issues of equity increased to `76,830
norms on margin requirements by the Securities crore during H1:2020-21 from `60,133 crore in the
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) from September corresponding period of the previous year.
1, 2020. Investor sentiment remained insipid in
IV.1.5 Foreign Exchange Market
September 2020 amidst concerns over steady increase
The INR exhibited movements in both directions
in coronavirus infections and weak global cues. After
against the US dollar during H1:2020-21. After
registering moderate gains due to improvement in
domestic manufacturing PMI for August 2020, equity depreciating to its lowest level of `76.81 on April 22,
sentiments turned negative with the BSE Sensex 2020, the INR subsequently appreciated owing to FPI
witnessing its biggest intra-day fall in more than four flows to the domestic equity market with the return
months on September 24 as spike in infections in some of risk appetite for EME assets and the depreciation of
European countries triggered fears of a second round the US dollar. The appreciation of the INR against the
of lockdown. Bullish sentiments, however, returned US dollar was modest as compared with EME peers
towards the end of the month amid expectations of (Chart IV.16a).
further stimulus measures by the government.
In terms of the 36-currency nominal effective exchange
During H1:2020-21, FPIs turned net buyers in the rate (NEER), the INR depreciated by 0.6 per cent (as
Indian equity market after panic sales in March due at end-September 2020 over the average of March
to flight to safety. MFs, however, were net sellers 2020), but it appreciated by 2.1 per cent in terms of
to the tune of `24,801 crore during H1:2020-21 the 36-currency real effective exchange rate (REER)
Chart IV.16: Cross-Currency Movements
a: Movement of Major EME Currencies against US Dollar b: Movement in REER
(end-September 2020 over end-March 2020) (August 2020 over March 2020)
-15.7 Argentina -12.7 Turkey
-14.3 Turkey -12.2 Brazil
-7.8 Brazil -5.7 SouthAfrica
-1.3 Russia -3.3 Argentina
2.2 India -2.7 China
3.3 Thailand -2.5 US
3.5 Malaysia -1.1 Russia
3.9 Taiwan -0.6 Malaysia
4.2 China 0.1 Mexico
5.3 Philippines 0.7 India
6.1 Mexico 0.7 Thailand
6.2 SouthAfrica 1.1 Indonesia
9.7 Indonesia 1.2 Taiwan
-5.2 US (DXY) 3.3 Philippines
-25.0 -15.0 -5.0 5.0 15.0 -15.0 -10.0 -5.0 0.0 5.0
Per cent Per cent
Note: Appreciation (+)/Depreciation (-).
Sources: RBI; FBIL; IMF; Bloomberg; Thomson Reuters; and Bank for International Settlements (BIS).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
exchange and equities) and compares the level of each
Table IV.2: Nominal and Real Effective Exchange
Rates – Trade-based Weights indicator on a certain day with its pre-turmoil level
(Base: 2004-05 = 100) (calibrated as zero on the scale) and with its level at
Item Index: Appreciation (+) / a ‘peak’ in the turmoil (calibrated as 100).8 The pre-
end-September Depreciation (-)
turmoil level for all indicators is taken as January 1,
2020(P) (Per cent)
end-September 2020 2020, while the peak turmoil day is indicator specific
over March (average)
2020 and happens to concentrate around March 24, 2020
36-currency REER 117.0 2.1 (the day of imposition of country-wide lockdown) and
36-currency NEER 70.8 -0.6
in some cases in May 2020 (Chart IV.17). The barometer
6-currency REER 123.8 1.8
6-currency NEER 59.6 -2.0 presents four different stages after the declaration of
`/US$ 73.8 0.7
the COVID-19 pandemic (by construction, a decreasing
P: Provisional.
tendency indicates recovery of the market segment).
Sources: RBI; and FBIL.
In response to the gradual opening of the economy
during the same period (Table IV.2). Between March
and the proactive measures taken by the Reserve
and August 2020, the appreciation of the INR in terms
Bank and the Government, an improvement in
of the REER was lower than that of the Indonesian
sentiments in the foreign exchange and stock market
rupiah, the Taiwan dollar and the Philippine peso
indicators took hold from May onwards. Money and
(Chart IV.16b).
bond market spreads started easing following (i) the
Financial Markets Barometer
introduction of the new benchmark paper on May 8,
A cross-market barometer illustrates vividly the 2020; (ii) the announcement of Atmanirbhar Bharat
recovery in financial markets from the disruptions stimulus package by the Government; and (iii) policy
caused by the pandemic.7 The barometer consists of rate cut of 40 bps on May 22, 2020. All nine indicators
nine indicators across markets (money, bonds, foreign suggest improvement in financial market sentiments
Chart IV.17: Financial Markets Barometer
a: 24-Mar-20 b: 8-May-20






-20
-40
(contd.)
7 European Central Bank (2007): Financial Stability Review, December.
8 Negative column for an indicator indicate values lower than its pre-turmoil level.

RNI/DSU htnom
1-ytilitaloV
deilpmI
htnom
1-aimerP
drawroF

YTFIN
XESNES XIV dna
PC
htnom-3
daerpSlliB-T dnaCFBNAAA
raey-3
daerpS
ceS-G
dna
ROBIM
htnom-3
daerpSlliB-T






-20
-40
Foreign Exchange Equity Markets Moneyand Bond
Markets
RNI/DSU htnom
1-ytilitaloV
deilpmI
htnom
1-aimerP
drawroF

YTFIN
XESNES XIV dna
PC
htnom-3
daerpSlliB-T dnaCFBNAAA
raey-3
daerpS
ceS-G
dna
ROBIM
htnom-3
daerpSlliB-T
Foreign Exchange Equity Markets Moneyand Bond
Markets
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
c: 7-Jul-20 d: 22-Sep-20






-20
-40
Sources: Bloomberg; CCIL: F-TRAC; FBIL; and RBI staff estimates.
in September vis-à-vis the elevated stress levels of
Chart IV.18: Non-food Credit Growth of SCBs
March and May.
IV.1.6 Credit Market
During H1:2020-21, bank credit offtake was anaemic,
reflecting weak demand and uncertainty in the wake
of the pandemic. Non-food credit growth (y-o-y) at 5.1
per cent as on September 25, 2020 was lower than 8.6
per cent a year ago, driven by weak momentum and
base effects (Chart IV.18).
The slowdown in credit growth was spread across all
bank groups, especially foreign banks. Credit growth
of the public sector banks remained modest, although
with some uptick since March 2020 (Chart IV.19a).
Note: Monthly numbers are based on average of the fortnights.
Of the incremental credit extended by the scheduled Source: RBI
commercial banks (SCBs) on a year-on-year basis
(September 27, 2019 to September 25, 2020), 62.3 per The deceleration in non-food credit growth was broad-
cent was provided by the public sector banks and 41.2 based with credit offtake slowing down in all the
per cent by the private sector banks, while the share major sectors. Though personal loans and credit to
of the foreign banks turned negative (Chart IV.19b). agriculture registered some improvement in July 2020,

RNI/DSU htnom
1-ytilitaloV
deilpmI
htnom
1-aimerP
drawroF

YTFIN
XESNES XIV dna
PC
htnom-3
daerpSlliB-T dnaCFBNAAA
raey-3
daerpS
ceS-G
dna
ROBIM
htnom-3
daerpSlliB-T






-20
-40
Foreign Exchange Equity Markets Moneyand Bond
Markets
RNI/DSU htnom
1-ytilitaloV
deilpmI
htnom
1-aimerP
drawroF
05 YTFIN XESNES XIV dna
PC
htnom-3
daerpSlliB-T dnaCFBNAAA
raey-3
daerpS
ceS-G
dna
ROBIM
htnom-3
daerpSlliB-T
Foreign Exchange Equity Markets Moneyand Bond
Markets
16.0 4.0
3.0
14.0
2.0
12.0
1.0
10.0 0.0
-1.0
8.0
-2.0
6.0
-3.0
4.0 -4.0
tnec
reP
81-tcO 81-voN 81-ceD 91-naJ 91-beF 91-raM 91-rpA 91-yaM 91-nuJ 91-luJ 91-guA 91-peS 91-tcO 91-voN 91-ceD 02-naJ 02-beF 02-raM 02-rpA 02-yaM 02-nuJ 02-luJ 02-guA 02-peS
stniop
egatnecreP
Baseeffect (RHS) Momentum (RHS)
y-o-y growth rate
Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.19: Credit Flow across Bank-Groups
a: Growth b: Share

3.2 100
80 41.2
60 85.0
40 62.3

0 11.8 -3.5
Sep-19 Sep-20
-20
Public sector banks Private sector banks Foreign banks
Source: RBI
the momentum could not be sustained in August. nuclear fuels, leather and leather products, wood
Credit growth to services and industrial sectors has and wood products, and paper and paper products
also tapered off after showing some promise in Q1; accelerated in August 2020 as compared with a year
2020-21 (Chart IV.20a). Personal loans accounted for ago. In contrast, credit growth to chemicals and
the largest share of total credit flow in August 2020, chemical products, rubber plastic and their products,
followed by services. While the share of personal infrastructure, construction, gems and jewellery, glass
loans, services and agriculture increased in August
and glassware, basic metal and metal products and
2020 vis-a-vis the previous year, the share of industry
beverage and tobacco decelerated/contracted. In the
contracted (Chart IV.20b).
services sector, credit growth to computer software
Within industry, credit growth to food processing, picked up significantly in recent months, reflecting
mining and quarrying, petroleum, coal products and the increased use of digital technology during the
Chart IV.20: Sectoral Deployment of Credit
a. Growth b: Share
Source: RBI.

tnec
reP


80 40.9
47.5 70


40 36.2
30 39.2

13.5 10 2.6
9.3 10.7

Aug-19 Aug-20
tnecreP
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0 10.6 8.6
5.0 4.9
0.0 0.5
Personal loans Services
Industry (micro andsmall,medium and large)
Agriculture and allied activities
)y-o-y(
tnecreP
81-rpA 81-luJ 81-tcO 91-naJ 91-rpA 91-luJ 91-tcO 02-naJ 02-rpA 02-nuJ
Agriculture & alliedactivities
Industry (micro & small, medium and large)
Services Personal loans
02-guA




6.0

5.2 0
-6 -4.3
-12
Public sector banks(including regional rural banks)
Private banks (including smallfinance banks)
Foreign banks AllSCBs
)y-o-y(tnec
reP
61-raM 61-nuJ 61-peS 61-ceD 71-raM 71-nuJ 71-peS 71-ceD 81-raM 81-nuJ 81-peS 81-ceD 91-raM 91-nuJ 91-peS 91-ceD 02-raM 02-nuJ 02-peS
5.3
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart IV.21: Non-Food Credit to Select Sub-Sectors
a: Growth b: Share
20 45

15 35

10 25
20 5

0 10

-5 0
Source: RBI.
COVID-19 period (Chart IV.21a). Credit to the NBFC (NPA) ratio declining to 8.0 per cent in June 2020 from
sector decelerated to 17.1 per cent in August 2020 from 9.4 per cent a year ago (Chart IV.22a). The NPA ratio in
38.8 per cent a year ago. In the personal loan segment, respect of agriculture and services increased over the
growth in vehicle loans accelerated from 3.7 per cent same period (Chart IV.22b).
in August 2019 to 8.4 per cent in August 2020; during
Boosted by TLTROs, non-SLR investments of banks
the same period, growth in housing loans decelerated
(comprising investments in CPs, bonds, debentures
from 16.6 per cent to 11.1 per cent. The share of trade
and shares of public and private corporates) increased
in non-food credit flow increased sharply in August
by 1.8 per cent in H1:2020-21 as against a decline of
2020 vis-a-vis its level in the corresponding month of
3.9 per cent in H1:2019-20 (Chart IV.23a). Adjusted
the previous year (Chart IV.21b).
non-food credit growth decelerated from 8.4 per
The asset quality of SCBs improved during 2020-21 cent in Q2:2019-20 to 5.1 per cent in Q2:2020-21
(up to June), with the overall non-performing assets (Chart IV.23b).
Chart IV.22: Stressed Assets and Non-Performing Assets of SCBs
a: Overall Loan Portfolio of SCBs b: Sectoral Non-Performing Assets
Source: RBI.

91-nuJ 91-luJ 91-guA 91-peS 91-tcO 91-voN 91-ceD 02-naJ 02-beF 02-raM 02-rpA 02-yaM 02-nuJ 02-luJ 02-guA
tnec
reP
12.5
8.4
7.1
17.1
6.6
Trade Computer software Vehicle loan
NBFCs (RHS) Commercialreal estate(RHS)
)y-o-y(
tnecreP
45.0
40.0 2.8
35.0 3.3
0.3 3.8 30.0 0.9
0.1 25.0
22.6
20.0
15.0 25.0
10.0
5.0 12.3
3.8
0.0
Aug-19 Aug-20
tnec
reP
Trade NBFCs Computer software
Vehicle loan Commercial realestate
25.0
22.5
20.0
17.5
15.0
12.5 12.92
10.0 10.36
7.5 7.22
5.0
2.5
1.82
0.0
tnec
reP
51-raM 51-luJ 51-voN 61-raM 61-luJ 61-voN 71-raM 71-luJ 71-voN 81-raM 81-luJ 81-voN 91-raM 91-luJ 91-voN 02-raM
Agriculture Industry Services Retailloans
02-nuJ
Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.23: Non-SLR Investments and Adjusted Non-Food Credit
a: Non-SLR Investments b: Adjusted Non-Food Credit
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000

-10,000
-20,000
-30,000
-40,000
H1:2019-20 H1:2020-21
Source: RBI.
Banks augmented their SLR portfolios in the wake of
Chart IV.24 : Excess SLR of Banks
deceleration in credit offtake and higher government
borrowings. Consequently, excess SLR maintained
by all scheduled commercial banks increased to 11.1
per cent of net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) in
Q2:2020-21 (up to August 28) from 7.1 per cent a year
ago (Chart IV.24).
IV.2 Monetary Policy Transmission
The transmission of policy repo rate changes to
deposit and lending rates of banks improved since
the April 2020 MPR. The weighted average lending
rate (WALR) on fresh rupee loans declined by 91 bps
since March 2020 in response to the reduction of 115
bps in the policy repo rate and comfortable liquidity Note: Excess SLR is based on the average of all reporting Fridays in the quarter.
Data for Q2:2020-21 is up to August 28, 2020.
conditions (Table IV.3). Source: RBI.
Table IV.3: Transmission from the Repo Rate to Banks’ Deposit and Lending Rates
(Basis points)
Period Repo Term Deposit Rates Lending Rates
Rate
Median WADTDR 1 - Year WALR - WALR -
Term Median Outstanding Fresh Rupee
Deposit Rate MCLR Rupee Loans Loans
February - September 2019 (Pre-external benchmark) -110 -9 -7 -30 2 -40
October 2019 - September 2020* (Post-external benchmark) -140 -157 -98 -114 -64 -122
March 2020 - September 2020* -115 -125 -59 -80 -46 -91
February 2019 - September 2020* -250 -190 -105 -138 -62 -162
*: Latest data on WALRs and WADTDR pertain to August 2020.
WALR: Weighted Average Lending Rate. WADTDR: Weighted Average Domestic Term Deposit Rate;
MCLR: Marginal Cost of Funds-based Lending Rate.
Source: RBI.

erorc`
Commercialpaper Bonds/Shares/Debentures
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart IV.25: Monetary Transmission - Chart IV.26: Median Term Deposit
Banks and Markets Rate and Liquidity Conditions
Sources: Bloomberg and RBI. Source: RBI.
The pass-through to WALR on fresh rupee loans was 2019 and 3.25-3.50 per cent immediately prior to the
higher than the softening of yield on 5-year corporate introduction of the external benchmark, were placed
bonds (79 bps) and yield on 10-year G-Secs during at 2.70-3.00 per cent in September 2020. The flexible
adjustment of saving deposit rates bodes well for
March – August 2020 (Chart IV.25). The WALR on
monetary transmission to lending rates in comparison
outstanding rupee loans declined by 46 bps during
to the rigidity characterising saving deposit rates in
this period, but this transmission is an improvement
earlier years.
over the earlier period.
The decline in both the lending and deposit rates is
Of the 105 bps reduction in the weighted average
more pronounced for foreign banks (Chart IV.27). The
domestic term deposit rate (WADTDR) on outstanding
deposit base of foreign banks is primarily made up
rupee deposits during the ongoing easing cycle (i.e., of low cost and lower duration wholesale deposits,
since February 2019), a little over half of the decline, which adjust quickly to policy rate changes. On the
i.e. 59 bps occurred since March 2020. The median other hand, the public sector banks depend more
term deposit rate, which reflects the prevailing card on retail term deposits and face competition from
alternative saving instruments like small savings,
rates, has registered a sizable decline of 125 bps
which constrains them from lowering rates in sync
since March 2020, reflecting the combined impact
with the policy rate. While the private sector banks
of surplus liquidity, the introduction of external
exhibited greater transmission in terms of WALR on
benchmark-based pricing of loans and weak credit
fresh rupee loans and WADTDR compared to public
demand conditions (Chart IV.26).
sector banks, the decline in WALR on outstanding
Apart from the reduction in term deposit rates, many rupee loans is more for public sector banks.
banks also lowered their saving deposit rates during The 1-year median marginal cost of funds-based
the current easing cycle. The saving deposit rates of lending rate (MCLR) charged by public sector banks
five major banks, which ranged 3.50-4.00 per cent at and private sector banks declined further during
the beginning of the easing cycle in early February H1:2020-21 (Chart IV.28).

tnec
reP
6.5

6.0 450000

5.5

5.0 150000

4.5
-50000
4.0 -150000
81-yaM 81-luJ 81-peS 81-voN 91-naJ 91-raM 91-yaM 91-yluJ 91-peS 91-voN 02-naJ 02-raM 02-yaM 02-yluJ 02-peS
erorc(cid:31)
NetLAF surplus(+) / deficit (-)(RHS)
Median term deposit rate
Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.29: Sector-wise WALRs Relative to
1-Year Median MCLR (August 2020)#
#Pertain to domestic banks.
Source: RBI.
Spreads of WALRs on outstanding rupee loans and housing and vehicle loans - are mostly unsecured and
fresh rupee loans over 1-year median MCLR were involve higher credit risk; hence, the spread charged
uneven across sectors (Chart IV.29). In personal was the highest for other personal loans. The lower
loans, the spread was among the lowest in respect WALRs on rupee export credit reflect the interest rate
of housing loans, reflecting lower defaults and the subvention provided by the government.
availability of collateral. Personal loans - other than
There has been a significant improvement in
transmission to all new loans sanctioned since
Chart IV.28: MCLR of Domestic Banks
October 2019 when the new floating rate loans to
retail and MSME sectors were mandatorily linked to
10.00
the external benchmark (Chart IV.30). The quantum
9.50
of decline in WALRs on personal and MSME loans was
9.00
8.65 more than that for aggregate fresh rupee loans to all
8.50 sectors (120 bps).
8.00
The introduction of external benchmark linked loans
7.50 7.35 has incentivised banks to adjust their term as well
as saving deposit rates in line with the benchmark
7.00
rates to protect their net interest margins (NIMs).
The reduction in term deposit rates applies only to
fresh term deposits, while it is across the board in
the case of saving deposits.9 The latter brings about
an instantaneous reduction in the banks’ cost of
Source: RBI.
funds, and in turn, in the MCLR and the lending rates
9 Saving deposits accounted for 32.2 per cent of aggregate deposits of scheduled commercial banks (excluding regional rural banks, payment banks and
small finance banks) as on September 25, 2020.

9102-naJ 9102-beF 9102-raM 9102-rpA 9102-yaM 9102-enuJ 9102-yluJ 9102-guA 9102-peS 9102-tcO 9102-voN 9102-ceD 0202-naJ 0202-beF 0202-raM 0202-rpA 0202-yaM 0202-enuJ 0202-yluJ 0202-guA 0202-peS
1-Yr median MCLR-public sector banks
1-Yr median MCLR-private sector banks
tnec
reP
Chart IV.27: Transmission across Bank Groups
(February 2019 - August 2020)
Source: RBI.
58-
821- 041-
27-
131-
001-
881-
24-
172-
891-
052-
841-
501-
821-
261-
26-

-50
-100
-150
-200
-250
-300
Public sector Private sector Foreign Scheduled
banks banks banks commercial
banks
stniop
sisaB
WADTDR 1-Yr Median MCLR
WALR-Fresh rupeeloans WALR-Outstandingrupee loans
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart IV.30: WALR on Personal Loans and Table IV.4: Loans linked to External Benchmark –
Loans to MSMEs - Variation Median Spread over Policy Repo Rate
(October 2019 - August 2020) (August 2020)
(Percentage points)
Personal Loans MSME
Loans
Housing Vehicle Education Other
Personal
Loans
Public Sector Banks (12) 3.4 4.7 4.5 6.6 5.7
Private Sector Banks (20) 5.8 7.0 7.2 6.8 7.2
Domestic Banks (32) 4.4 5.1 5.2 6.6 6.4
Source: RBI.
After lowering these rates sharply during Q1:2020-
21, small saving interest rates were left unchanged
for Q2:2020-21 and Q3:2020-21 notwithstanding
the decline in G-sec yields during the reference
Source: RBI.
period, resulting in a wedge of 40-120 bps in Q2
and 83-203 bps in Q3 in respect of various small
on fresh rupee loans (provided the spread over the savings instruments relative to the formula-based
MCLR remains relatively stable). Thus, the impact of rates, with implications for monetary transmission
introduction of external benchmark-based pricing of (Table IV.5).
loans on monetary transmission has encompassed
IV.3 Liquidity Conditions and the Operating
even sectors that are not linked to external benchmark
Procedure of Monetary Policy
loan pricing.
The RBI Act 1934 requires the RBI to place the
In respect of fresh rupee loans linked to the policy
operating procedure relating to the implementation
repo rate, the median spread charged by domestic
of monetary policy and changes thereto from time to
banks was the highest in the case of other personal
time, if any, in the public domain. During H1:2020-
loans, followed by that for the MSME sector, whereas
21, liquidity management operations by the RBI were
housing loans have the lowest spread. Among the bank
conducted as per the revised liquidity management
groups, the median spread charged by public sector
framework introduced on February 14, 2020 and
banks for different categories of loans was lower than
guided by the need to expand liquidity in the
those of private sector banks (Table IV.4).
system sizeably to ensure that financial markets and
Administered interest rates on small savings are institutions function normally in the face of COVID-
linked to market yields on G-secs with a lag and are related dislocations, consistent with the monetary
fixed on a quarterly basis at a spread of 0-100 bps over policy stance (see Chapter III of Annual Report 2019-
and above G-sec yields of comparable maturities. 20 for details).10
10 Reserve Bank of India (2020): Annual Report 2019-20, Monetary Policy Operations, August 25.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Table IV.5: Interest Rates on Small Savings Instruments - Q3:2020-21
Small Savings Scheme Maturity Spread Average G-sec Formula based Government Difference
(years) (Percentage Yield (%) of Rate of Interest Announced Rate (basis points)
point) $ Corresponding (%) (applicable of Interest (%) in
Maturity (June - for Q3:2020-21) Q3:2020-21
August 2020)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (3) + (4) (6) (7) = (6) - (5)
Savings Deposit - - - - 4.00 -
Public Provident Fund 15 0.25 6.02 6.27 7.10 83
Term Deposits
1 Year 1 0 3.47 3.47 5.50 203
2 Year 2 0 3.92 3.92 5.50 158
3 Year 3 0 4.38 4.38 5.50 112
5 Year 5 0.25 5.29 5.54 6.70 116
Recurring Deposit Account 5 0 4.38 4.38 5.80 142
Monthly Income Scheme 5 0.25 5.27 5.52 6.60 108
Kisan Vikas Patra 124 Months 0 6.02 6.02 6.90 88
NSC VIII issue 5 0.25 5.40 5.65 6.80 115
Senior Citizens Saving Scheme 5 1.00 5.29 6.29 7.40 111
Sukanya Samriddhi Account Scheme 21 0.75 6.02 6.77 7.60 83
$: Spreads for fixing small saving rates as per Government of India Press Release of February 2016.
Note: Compounding frequency varies across instruments.
Sources: Government of India; and RBI staff estimates.
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse of the economy, the policy interest rate corridor was
impact on real economic activity, the Reserve Bank widened to 90 bps through a reduction of 25 bps in
reduced the policy repo rate by 40 bps on May 22, 2020 the reverse repo rate on April 17, 2020. Liquidity
on top of a 75 bps reduction on March 27. In order to augmenting measures initiated since February 2020
make it relatively unattractive for banks to passively were further reinforced during H1:2020-21, including
park funds with the Reserve Bank and to encourage those targeted at specific sectors and entities to
their deployment for on-lending to productive sectors alleviate liquidity and funding stress (Box IV.2).
Box IV.2: Measures Augmenting Liquidity and Fostering Orderly Market Conditions
(i) Auctions of long term repo operations (LTRO) MSMEs from the maintenance of cash reserve ratio
during February-March 2020 for one-year and three- (CRR), with a view to revitalise the flow of bank
year tenors to facilitate monetary transmission and credit to productive sectors having multiplier effects
augment credit flows to productive sectors. on growth.
(ii) Scheduled commercial banks were allowed (iii) Two 6-month US dollar/INR sell/buy swap auctions
exemption on incremental credit disbursed by them were conducted on March 16 and March 23, 2020
between January 31-July 31, 2020 on retail loans cumulatively providing dollar liquidity amounting
for automobiles, residential housing and loans to to US$ 2.7 billion.
(contd.)

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
(iv) Fine-tuning variable rate repo auctions were least 50 per cent of the total amount availed going
conducted during March 2020 to provide flexibility to small and mid-sized non-banking financial
to the banking system in its liquidity management companies (NBFCs) and micro finance institutions
towards the year end. As a special case, standalone (MFIs).
primary dealers (SPDs) were allowed to participate in
(xi) Special refinance facilities for a total amount of
these auctions along with other eligible participants.
`75,000 crore at the policy repo rate to the National
(v) To facilitate year-end liquidity management of SPDs, Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
liquidity available to them under the Standing (NABARD), the Small Industries Development Bank
Liquidity Facility (SLF) was temporarily enhanced of India (SIDBI), the National Housing Bank (NHB)
from `2,800 crore to `10,000 crore on March 24, and the Export-Import Bank of India (EXIM Bank) to
2020. The facility was available till April 17, 2020. meet sectoral credit needs.
(vi) The CRR requirement of banks was reduced by 100 (xii) Special liquidity facility for mutual funds (SLF-MF)
bps – from 4.0 per cent of net demand and time to alleviate intensified liquidity pressures from
liabilities (NDTL) to 3.0 per cent of NDTL on March redemption burdens faced by MFs.
27, 2020 – effective fortnight beginning March 28,
(xiii) As part of the Atmanirbhar Bharat package
2020, for a period of one year ending March 26,
announced by GoI in May, a scheme was introduced
2021, augmenting primary liquidity in the banking
through a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) to improve
system by about `1.37 lakh crore.
the liquidity position of NBFCs including MFIs and
(vii) Taking cognisance of hardships faced by banks in housing finance companies (HFCs) registered with
terms of social distancing of staff and consequent the Reserve Bank for avoiding any potential systemic
strains on reporting requirements, the requirement risks to the financial sector.
of minimum maintenance of daily CRR balance was
(xiv) Term repo operations at floating rates (i.e., at the
reduced from 90 per cent to 80 per cent effective
prevailing repo rate) in September to assuage
from the fortnight beginning March 28, 2020. This
liquidity pressures on account of advance tax
dispensation was available up to September 25, 2020.
outflows. Banks that had availed of funds under
(viii) Banks’ limit for borrowing overnight under the LTROs (at 5.15 per cent) were allowed to reverse
marginal standing facility (MSF) by dipping into these transactions before maturity and avail fresh
their statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) was raised to 3 funds at 4 per cent (current repo rate).
per cent of NDTL from 2 per cent – effective up to
(xv) From September 1, 2020, banks were allowed to hold
March 31, 2021 – allowing them to avail additional
fresh acquisitions of SLR securities under held to
liquidity under the LAF window at the reduced MSF maturity (HTM) category up to an overall limit of 22
rate. per cent (increased from 19.5 per cent) of NDTL up
(ix) Targeted long-term repo operations (TLTROs) of to March 31, 2021.
up to three years tenor at a floating rate linked to (xvi) Purchases of government securities under OMOs
the policy repo rate for deployment in investment of `1.91 lakh crore since February 6 and up to
grade corporate bonds, commercial paper, and September 30, 2020.
non-convertible debentures over and above the
(xvii) In order to distribute liquidity more evenly across the
outstanding level of investments in these bonds as
yield curve and improve transmission, six ‘operation
on March 27, 2020.
twist’ auctions were conducted in H1:2020-21 (on
(x) Targeted long-term repo operations (TLTRO) 2.0 April 27, July 2, August 27, September 3, 10 and 17)
auctions in tranches of appropriate sizes, with at for `10,000 crore each.11
11 While operation twist is intended to be liquidity neutral, the outcome of the 6 auctions resulted in net liquidity absorption of `2,768 crore (sales of
`59,900 crore vis-a-vis purchases of `57,132 crore).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Overall, total liquidity support announced by the Drivers and Management of Liquidity
Reserve Bank since February 6 (up to September 30,
During H1:2020-21, the key drivers of systemic
2020) amounted to `11.1 lakh crore (5.5 per cent of
liquidity were currency in circulation (CiC), net forex
GDP) (Table IV.6).
operations by the Reserve Bank and Government of
India (GoI) cash balances. The large expansion in CiC
Table IV.6: Monetary and Liquidity Measures
was the major source of leakage, particularly during
since February 6
Q1. Liquidity was augmented by a large drawdown of
(up to September 30, 2020)
(` crore) excess CRR balances by commercial banks consequent
Measures Announcement to the one percentage point reduction of CRR. While
LTRO 2,00,000 the steady build-up of GoI cash balances in Q2
Variable rate repo 1,75,000
moderated the level of surplus, the Reserve Bank’s
SLF for PDs 7,200
forex purchase operations augmented systemic
CRR cut 1,37,000
MSF (dip by 1% in SLR) 1,37,000 liquidity throughout H1 (Chart IV.31a). In terms of
TLTRO 1,00,000
liquidity management, durable liquidity was injected
TLTRO (2.0) 50,000
Net OMO purchases 50,000 through TLTROs and OMO purchases (mainly in Q1),
Special liquidity facility for mutual funds 50,000 while transient liquidity movements were managed
Refinance to NABARD,SIDBI,NHB and EXIM bank 75,000
through LAF operations (Chart IV.31b).
Special liquidity scheme for NBFCs 30,000
56-day term repo 1,00,000
CiC growth (y-o-y) of `2.36 lakh crore (9.6 per cent)
Total 11,11,200
during H1:2020-21 significantly outpaced the
As proportion of GDP* (Per cent) 5.5
expansion of `49,378 crore (2.3 per cent) in H1:2019-20
*: Nominal GDP 2019-20.
Source: RBI. (Chart IV.32). The large scale of CiC expansion
Chart IV.31: Systemic Liquidity – Drivers and Management
a: Drivers b: Management
3,00,000
2,00,000
1,00,000

-1,00,000
-2,00,000
-3,00,000
Q3:2019-20 Q4:2019-20 Q1:2020-21 Q2:2020-21
-4,00,000
Note: (+) implies injection of liquidity while (-) implies absorption/leakage of liquidity; Data are based on the last Friday of the quarter.
Source: RBI.

erorc(cid:31)
1,50,000
1,00,000
50,000

-50,000
-1,00,000
-1,50,000 Q3:2019-20 Q4:2019-20 Q1:2020-21 Q2:2020-21
CiC Net forexpurchases GoI cash balances Excess CRR
erorc(cid:31)
Net OMO purchases LTRO TLTRO (1.0 + 2.0)
CRR reduction Net LAF operations
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart IV.32 Currency in Circulation Chart IV.33: Liquidity Management
40,000 25.0
30,000
20.0
20,000
15.0 10,000

10.0
-10,000
5.0
-20,000
-30,000 0.0
Source: RBI. Source: RBI.
indicates heightened precautionary demand for cash Surplus liquidity conditions persisted in Q2, although
in a pandemic-stricken environment. with some moderation relative to Q1. Large liquidity
injection through the Reserve Bank’s net forex
Fuelled by the infusion of `87,891 crore through
purchase operations in July was offset by moderate
four TLTRO auctions in April, systemic liquidity
CiC expansion and gradual build-up of GoI cash
remained in abundance with average daily net
balances as government spending remained subdued.
absorptions under the LAF progressively increasing
Daily net absorptions under the LAF averaged
from `3.02 lakh crore in March to `4.75 lakh crore
`3.95 lakh crore in July as average GoI cash surplus
in April and further to `5.31 lakh crore in May 2020,
increased to `95,938 crore. Thereafter, daily net
notwithstanding large liquidity withdrawal from the
absorptions increased to `4.03 lakh crore in August
banking system due to CiC expansion (Chart IV.33).
but moderated to `3.68 lakh crore in September due
Sustained government spending through higher
to higher GoI cash surplus (average of `1.68 lakh crore
recourse to WMA/OD (average of `1.01 lakh crore and
in August and `2.80 lakh crore in September). The
`1.14 lakh crore in April and May, respectively) also
RBI also injected liquidity through OMO purchases,
added to the liquidity surplus. With the onset of the
particularly during Q1:2020-21. Total injection of
monsoon season, government spending decelerated
durable liquidity (including forex purchases, OMOs
and GoI cash balances turned into surplus in June
and TLTRO) in H1:2020-21 amounted to `5.38 lakh
(average of `34,838 crore); consequently, average
crore as compared to `5.86 lakh crore in H2:2019-20
daily net absorptions under the LAF moderated to
(Chart IV.34).
`4.08 lakh crore. Overall, net average absorption of
surplus liquidity at `4.71 lakh crore in Q1:2020-21 was Summing up, systemic liquidity surplus increased
the highest since January-March 2017 – the quarter during H1:2020-21 reflecting the conventional and
immediately following demonetisation. unconventional measures by the Reserve Bank to

)erorc(cid:31)(snoitairaV
ylkeeW
)tnec
rep(
htworg
Y-o-Y
2019-20 2020-21
2019-20(RHS) 2020-21(RHS)
02-rpA-30 02-rpA-01 02-rpA-42 02-yaM-80 02-yaM-22 02-nuJ-50 02-nuJ-91 02-luJ-30 02-luJ-71 02-luJ-13 02-guA-41 02-guA-82 02-peS-11 02-peS-52
3,00,000
2,00,000
1,00,000

-1,00,000
-2,00,000
-3,00,000
-4,00,000
-5,00,000
-6,00,000
-7,00,000
-8,00,000
-9,00,000
Totalrepo (including LTRO andTLTRO) Totalreverse repo
Marginal standing facility Net OMO sales (-)/purchases (+)
Net injection (+)/ absorption (-)
erorc(cid:31)
91-tcO-1 91-tcO-61 91-tcO-13 91-voN-51 91-voN-03 91-ceD-51 91-ceD-03 02-naJ-41 02-naJ-92 02-beF-31 02-beF-82 02-raM-41 02-raM-92 02-rpA-31 02-rpA-82 02-yaM-31 02-yaM-82 02-nuJ-21 02-nuJ-72 02-luJ-21 02-luJ-72 02-guA-11 02-guA-62 02-peS-01 02-peS-03
Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.34: Durable Liquidity Injections Chart IV.35: Discretionary Liquidity,
Autonomous Drivers and Reverse Repo
5,00,000
4,00,000
3,00,000
2,00,000
1,00,000

-1,00,000
-2,00,000
-3,00,000
-4,00,000
-5,00,000
-6,00,000
-7,00,000
-8,00,000
-9,00,000
Note: Data are based on the last Friday of the quarter. Note: Data are based on a weeekly basis (as on Friday).
Source: RBI. Source: RBI.
ensure conducive financial conditions and stability in of capital inflows is an indicator of growing investor
financial markets and institutions. The extent of the confidence in the Indian economy. The pace of
surplus is gauged from the large amounts absorbed monetary transmission has also quickened, but credit
under the reverse repo facility, which peaked at more growth remains feeble, clouding the outlook. Going
than `8.5 lakh crore on May 5, 2020 (Chart IV.35). forward, liquidity conditions would continue to be
calibrated, consistent with the stance of monetary
IV.4 Conclusion
policy while ensuring normalcy in the functioning
Domestic financial markets have gradually regained of financial markets and institutions and conducive
normalcy in the wake of sizable conventional and financial conditions. Efficient monetary policy
unconventional measures by the Reserve Bank. transmission, particularly to the credit market, would
Turnover in various market segments is increasing continue to assume priority in the hierarchy of policy
and spreads have narrowed appreciably. The return objectives.

erorc(cid:31)
Reverserepo
Discretionary liquidity (LTROs, TLTROs andOMOs)
Forex operations GoI cashbalances
02-naJ-30 02-naJ-42 02-beF-41 02-raM-60 02-raM-72 02-rpA-71 02-yaM-80 02-yaM-92 02-nuJ-91 02-luJ-01 02-luJ-13 02-guA-12 02-peS-52
V. External Environment
The global economy is still reeling under the impact of the unprecedented shock caused by COVID-19. Even as
high frequency indicators suggest that the economic activity may have begun to bottom out in Q3, the near-term
outlook remains hostage to the virus and the attendant uncertainty regarding its vaccine. Inflation has remained
largely subdued and below central banks’ target for advanced economies (AEs) as also for some emerging market
economies (EMEs). Monetary policy remained highly accommodative with key policy rates reduced to their lowest
level in most countries. Global financial markets remained buoyant, supported by signals that the highly
accommodative monetary policy would continue for long.
The pandemic has plunged the global economy into The recovery, however, is nascent and hinges on the
its deepest contraction in history in Q2:2020. World duration of the pandemic and discovery of the vaccine.
merchandise trade volume contracted by 14.3 per cent
Underlying the stabilisation of financial markets, the
(q-o-q) in Q2. Just as various economies were engaging
easing of financial conditions and the hesitant recovery
in unlocking activity, and a general sense emerging of
is the unprecedented policy response of monetary
the global economy stabilising and getting poised for a
and fiscal authorities. These actions have led to a
recovery in Q3, fresh waves of infections have surged,
renewal of risk appetite and search for yields, slowing
threatening these positive impulses. Meanwhile, the precautionary flight to cash. Notwithstanding this
commodity prices have firmed up, pushing up defence, the outlook is highly uncertain, policy space
inflation. Although headline and core inflation remain is largely used up and the virulence of the pandemic is
subdued and below target in several economies, food yet to abate for recovery to gain traction.
price pressures are firming up. Global spillovers have
V.1 Global Economic Conditions
accentuated, mainly through financial channels.
In the US, GDP growth contracted by a record 31.4
Although financial markets have recovered from the
per cent [q-o-q, seasonally adjusted annualised rate
panic sell-offs in Q1:2020 and capital flows to EMEs
(SAAR)] in Q2:2020, marking the worst plunge since
have resumed on the return of risk sentiment, asset
the present GDP series began in 1947. Coming on the
prices are volatile, out of alignment with underlying
heels of a 5.0 per cent contraction in Q1:2020, the
fundamentals, and the outlook is uncertain. Monetary
US economy was pushed into a technical recession
policy guidance from systemic central banks has led
(Table V.1). Most US states imposed complete
to weakening of the US dollar with corresponding
shutdowns in April and for most part of May with
appreciation in other currencies, especially EME
only gradual and uneven reopening and relaxation in
currencies, with implications for export performance
preventive measures towards the end of the quarter.
and growth. In addition, disruptions in global value
While the unemployment rate has declined markedly
chains (GVCs) have amplified supply shocks inflicted
from an all-time high in April, it remains much above
by the pandemic.
the pre-COVID level. Industrial output continued to
Some near-term indicators have improved. Global contract through August, though the momentum
purchasing managers’ index (PMI) indicates that on a appears to be picking up as reflected in robust growth
month-on-month basis, the output and new orders as in retail sales since end of Q2. The manufacturing
also business sentiments have revived since July and PMI moved back into expansion zone from June. The
new export orders returned to growth in September. recent resurgence of COVID-19 cases has increased

Chapter V External Environment
– following a contraction of 14.1 per cent in Q1.
Table V.1: Real GDP Growth
Industrial production and retail sales collapsed, while
(Per cent)
employment situation and consumer sentiments
Country Q2- Q3- Q4- Q1- Q2- 2020 2021
2019 2019 2019 2020 2020 (P) (P) worsened in April-May as most member countries
Quarter-over-quarter (q-o-q) seasonally adjusted, annualised rate adopted extensive and prolonged lockdown measures
Canada 3.4 1.1 0.6 -8.2 -38.7 -8.4 4.9 to fight the health crisis. With retail sales improving
Euro area 0.5 1.3 0.2 -14.1 -39.4 -10.2 6.0 in June and the composite PMI moving back into the
Japan 1.6 0.2 -7.0 -2.3 -28.1 -5.8 2.4
expansion zone in July, the Euro economy exhibited
South Korea 4.1 1.5 5.4 -5.0 -12.0 -2.1 3.0
signs of recovery in the early part of Q3. However,
UK -0.1 1.3 0.6 -9.7 -58.7 -10.2 6.3
US 1.5 2.6 2.4 -5.0 -31.4 -8.0 4.5 the momentum has slowed down as increase in fresh
Year-on-year (y-o-y) wave of infections prompted some countries in the
region to reinstate restrictions.
Advanced Economies
Canada 2.0 1.6 1.5 -0.9 -13.0 -8.4 4.9 The Japanese economy contracted by 28.1 per cent
Euro area 1.2 1.4 1.0 -3.2 -14.7 -10.2 6.0
(q-o-q, SAAR) per cent in Q2, marking the third
Japan 0.9 1.7 -0.7 -1.8 -9.9 -5.8 2.4
straight quarter of contraction and the steepest
South Korea 2.1 2.0 2.3 1.4 -2.7 -2.1 3.0
UK 1.3 1.0 1.0 -2.1 -21.5 -10.2 6.3 on record, as private consumption and industrial
US 2.0 2.1 2.3 0.3 -9.0 -8.0 4.5
production slumped, while public spending and
Emerging Market Economies business fixed investment declined sharply following
Brazil 1.1 1.2 1.7 -0.3 -11.4 -9.1 3.6 the nation-wide state of emergency. Furthermore,
China 6.2 6.0 6.0 -6.8 3.2 1.0 8.2
plummeting exports on disrupted supply chains and
India 5.2 4.4 4.1 3.1 -23.9 -4.5 6.0
weak external demand led to further deterioration
Indonesia 5.1 5.0 5.0 3.0 -5.3 -0.3 6.1
Philippines 5.5 6.0 6.7 -0.7 -16.5 -3.6 6.8 in economic conditions. While gradual reopening,
Russia 1.1 1.5 2.1 1.6 -8.0 -6.6 4.1
both domestically and abroad, has eased demand and
South Africa 0.9 0.1 -0.5 0.1 -17.1 -8.0 3.5
supply conditions and helped stabilise manufacturing
Thailand 2.4 2.6 1.5 -2.0 -12.2 -7.7 5.0
activity, available high frequency indicators remained
Memo: 2019 (E) 2020 (P) 2021 (P)
in contraction zone through August.
World 2.9 -4.9 5.4
Output
The UK economy fell into a technical recession in Q2
World Trade 0.9 -11.9 8.0
Volume as prolonged confinement measures weighed heavily
E: Estimate P: Projection q-o-q: quarter-over-quarter y-o-y: year-on-year on economic activity. While the economy rebounded
Note: India's data correspond to fiscal year (April-March).
in June as gradual withdrawal of restrictions released
Sources: Bloomberg; and International Monetary Fund.
pent-up demand, it was not strong enough to offset
the magnitude of economic slack that the country
downside risks as many states hold off or reverse
experienced during the period of complete shutdown.
unlocking.
The recovery continued into Q3 as both manufacturing
Economic activity in the Euro area plunged at a and services PMI strengthened since July on robust
record pace in Q2 as frozen business and household output and new orders, reflecting improved consumer
activity caused by stringent lockdowns and social and business spending. The unemployment rate,
distancing measures inflicted an unprecedented however, remains high and investment intentions
blow to all constituent economies. GDP of the Euro have remained weak. In September, some lockdown
area contracted by 39.4 per cent (q-o-q, SAAR) in measures were re-imposed as a second wave of
Q2 – the sharpest since the series began in 1995 infections hit the UK.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
The Chinese economy bounced back in Q2 with GDP Among other BRICS countries, economic activity
growing at 3.2 per cent (on y-o-y basis) as against a record plunged markedly in Q2. Brazil, India and Russia are
contraction of 6.8 per cent in Q1. The turnaround was among the top five COVID-19 infected countries in the
spearheaded by rising investment in infrastructure, world. Key macroeconomic indicators among BRICS
supported by government spending, and increase nations suggest that macroeconomic performance in
in exports of medical products and electronics. The 2020 could worsen further (Table V.2).
uptrend continued into Q3 as exports improved
The Russian economy shrank in Q2, birched by the
further since July amidst a modest improvement in
pandemic induced lockdowns and sharp fall in oil
external demand, and industrial production remained
prices. All sectors, barring agriculture, were severely
stable despite heavy floods experienced in some parts
impacted amidst stringent measures adopted to
of the country. Manufacturing activity as measured by
stem the pandemic. Industrial production and retail
the manufacturing PMI recorded expansion in each
sales contracted through August on muted business
month since May, supported by rising output and
and consumer confidence, while the unemployment
new orders. On the other hand, retail sales remain
rate has risen. The Brazilian economy entered into a
weak on depressed private consumption under social
distancing measures. While the Chinese economy technical recession in Q2, following sharp declines
is expected to maintain the pace of its recovery, the in household consumption, industrial and services
prolonged global downturn, re-escalating tensions sector activity. The growth outlook remains clouded
with the US and persistent risk of a second wave of as external demand is expected to remain weak, while
COVID-19 infections remain major headwinds, going domestic spending and industrial activity are likely
forward. to stay subdued with social distancing measures in
Table V.2: Select Macroeconomic Indicators for BRICS
Country 2013 2019 2020(P) Country 2013 2019 2020(P)
Real GDP growth rate Brazil 3.0 1.1 -9.1 General Govt. gross debt Brazil# 60.2 89.5 102.3
(per cent) Russia 1.8 1.3 -6.6 (as per cent of GDP) Russia 13.1 13.9 18.5
India 6.4 4.2 -4.5 India 67.4 72.2 84.0
China 7.8 6.1 1.0 China 37.0 52.0 64.1
South Africa 2.5 0.2 -8.0 South Africa 44.1 62.2 79.9
Inflation rate (per cent) Brazil 6.2 3.7 3.6 CAB as per cent of GDP Brazil -3.2 -2.7 -1.8
Russia 6.8 4.5 3.1 Russia 1.5 3.8 0.7
India 9.4 4.5 3.3 India -1.7 -1.1 -0.6
China 2.6 2.9 3.0 China 1.5 1.0 0.5
South Africa 5.8 4.1 2.4 South Africa -5.8 -3.0 0.2
General Govt. net Brazil -3.0 -6.0 -9.3 Forex reserves* Brazil 358.8 356.9 356.5
lending/borrowing Russia -1.2 1.9 -4.8 (in US$ billion) Russia 510.1 554.4 594.5
(as per cent of GDP)
India -7.0 -7.4 -7.4 India 294.8 461.8 545.5
China -0.8 -6.4 -11.2 China - 3388.7 3464.2
South Africa -4.3 -6.3 -13.3 South Africa 49.6 55.1 55.7
P: Projection
*: Data on forex reserves for 2020 pertains to the forex reserves holding as of August 2020 for all countries except for China whose data was avaialble till
July 2020.
#: Gross debt refers to the non-financial public sector, excluding Eletrobras and Petrobras, and includes sovereign debt held by the central bank.
Notes: India's data correspond to fiscal year (April-March). Data for India are IMF's projections.
Sources: WEO, IMF; and IRFCL, IMF.

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.1: Survey Indicators
a: Composite PMI b: OECD CLIs










Source: Bloomberg; and OECD.
place. The South African economy experienced a term trend and much lower than the pre-COVID levels
severe disruption in Q2, the steepest on record, as (Chart V.1b).
industrial production and retail sales plummeted
Global trade which was sluggish prior to the outbreak
to record low levels in April and remained in
of COVID-19, moved into deep contraction in
contraction through the entire quarter. South-East
Q2:2020, with AEs contributing more to the decline
Asian countries also registered sharp contraction in
than EME peers (Chart V.2a). The WTO’s Goods Trade
Q2, in tandem with other major EMEs and AEs as
Barometer posted a steep decline – its constituent
economic activity came to near standstill following
indices pertaining to automotive products and air
widespread lockdowns.
freight contracted, although components such as
The global composite PMI moved back to the
export orders witnessed incipient signs of recovery,
expansion zone in July and improved further
and contraction eased in electronic components and
in August and September after remaining in
raw materials.
contraction for five months and a record low level
in April. The revival in output and new orders as Forward looking indicators also suggest a tentative
also improved business optimism, led the recovery nascent recovery in world trade. The Baltic Dry Index,
(Chart V.1a). Among OECD economies, composite that had declined sharply during H2:2019 and Q1:2020,
leading indicators (CLIs) suggest firming up of the recovered sharply in June but has since softened
growth momentum across major AEs and EMEs since moderately (Chart V.2b). However, uncertainty over a
June, recovering from lows in April. Notwithstanding possible recovery remains a cause of concern due to
the recovery, the levels still remain below the long- rise in fresh virus cases in some parts of Europe, along

xednI
91-naJ 91-beF 91-raM 91-rpA 91-yaM 91-nuJ 91-luJ 91-guA 91-peS 91-tcO 91-voN 91-ceD 02-naJ 02-beF 02-raM 02-rpA 02-yaM 02-nuJ 02-luJ 02-guA
US Japan Brazil Euro Area
Russia SouthAfrica China
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart V.2: World Trade Volume
a: World Trade Volume: Relative Contribution b: Movement in World Trade Volume and Baltic Index
10.0
5.0
0.0
-5.0
-10.0
-15.0
-20.0
Source: CPB Netherlands; and CEIC.
with the rapid spread in major EMEs. The pandemic significant supply chain disruptions reconfiguring the
has also exposed the integrated global economy to global value chains (Box V.1).
Box V.1: Global Value Chains: Regaining Foothold
After the 1990s, international trade proliferated on the during the pandemic (Chart V.1.1b). The survey estimates
back of the rise of global value chains (GVCs) which that potential restructuring in global value chains could
contributed to increase in productivity and came to be shift 16 to 26 per cent (US$ 2.9 trillion to US$ 4.6 trillion)
viewed as a fast track to industrialisation for the emerging of global goods exports to new countries in the next five
market economies (Baldwin, 2011; Ignatenko et al., 2019). years. It identifies three sectors, viz., pharmaceuticals,
After the global financial crisis, however, GVCs slowed petroleum and apparel where the shift in supply chain
down with the confluence of protectionist trade policies. networks might happen (McKinsey Global Institute,
More recently, COVID-19 has accentuated the contraction 2020).
in global trade volumes with major supply disruptions –
The extent to which a country is integrated into these
around 80 countries have imposed export restrictions and
supply chains can be measured by the GVC participation
prohibitions on medical supplies and pharmaceuticals
index, which is a sum of backward and forward linkages.
(WTO, 2020).
With the pandemic expected to diversify the supply
A survey of 23 industry value chains conducted by chains from the current manufacturing hub, beneficiaries
could be countries such as Vietnam, Mexico and India.
Mckinsey Global Institute (2020) revealed that the
The determinants of GVC participation such as economic
semiconductor industry, followed by communication
fundamentals, factor endowments, geography, market
equipment, medical devices, pharmaceuticals, aerospace,
size and institutional environment can be examined in an
automobile, machinery and chemical industry would
empirical framework (Fernandes et al., 2020) specified as
be the most affected by trade-related disruptions
follows:
(Chart V.1.1a). The apparel industry followed by
aerospace, furniture and petroleum products, transport, V = a + a X + T + e
it 0 i it t it
automobile and textile would be exposed to higher risks
(contd.)

1Q 2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q 2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q 2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q 2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q 2Q yluJ
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
stniopegatnecreP
6.0 100.0
3.0 80.0
0.0
60.0
-3.0
40.0
-5.5
-6.0
20.0
-1.1
-9.0
-6.6 0.0
-12.0
-20.0
-15.0
-18.0 -40.0
-21.0 -60.0
EMEs AEs World Trade (per cent,y-o-y)
y-o-y,tnec
reP
71-beF 71-rpA 71-nuJ 71-guA 71-tcO 71-ceD 81-beF 81-rpA 81-nuJ 81-guA 81-tcO 81-ceD 91-beF 91-rpA 91-nuJ 91-guA 91-tcO 91-ceD 02-beF 02-rpA 02-nuJ
y-o-y,tnec
reP
-6.6
-12.8
World Trade Baltic DryIndex (RHS)
Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.1.1: Exposure of Industry Value Chains to Shocks
a: Trade b: Pandemic
Note: Chart considers exposure to shocks, but no action taken to build resilience or mitigate impact.
Source: McKinsey Global Institute.
where the dependent variable (V) is either backward or local procurement norms for single-brand retail trade
forward participation expressed in logarithmic terms has generated interest among global tech and retail
and subscripts i and t represent country and time period, giants such as Apple and Ikea. Manufacturing units in
respectively. X represents a vector of trade policy related India may provide a unique opportunity to expand the
explanatory variables viz., net foreign direct investment country’s foothold in GVCs. Lower tariff rates and better
(FDI) inflows; weighted average tariff rates; resource connectivity with the GVC hub can also contribute to
endowments, viz., ratio of capital to GDP, ratio of land stronger backward linkages. However, the estimates also
to GDP and rents from resources; domestic industrial show that countries with a larger domestic industrial
capacity measured in terms of manufacturing sector’s capacity exhibit lower backward participation as they
value-added; logistic performance index; political stability may rely less on imported inputs and use more domestic
and distance from GVC hub e.g., the US, Germany and inputs for exports (Chart V.1.2a).
China. Variable T controls for time fixed effects. The
t Countries with better performance in logistics, lower
model is estimated on 144 countries for the period 1990-
distance from the GVC hub and greater land and natural
2018 using UNCTAD (Eora database).
resource endowment exhibit significantly stronger
The decomposition of backward participation reveals that forward participation than peers (Chart V.1.2b). As
better logistic performance, higher capital endowment, in the case of backward linkages, a country’s capital
stable political environment and higher FDI are central affects forward participation positively, though the
to strengthening backward linkages in the supply chain. effect is not statistically significant. Countries seeking
These results assume significance in the context of to expand foothold in GVCs need to lower trade barriers,
several initiatives to strengthen logistic infrastructure demonstrate higher reliance on regional or free trade
through national trade facilitation plan which aims to agreements, provide cutting edge logistics infrastructure,
transform the trade ecosystem by reducing the time increase industrial capacity and strengthen political
and cost of doing business. Consequently, relaxation in stability.
(contd.)

lacituecamrahP secived
lacideM
egareveb
dnadooF
erutlucirgA stnenopmoc
dna
srotcudnocimeS
latem
cisaB
tnempiuqe
lacirtcelE
lacimehC scinortcele
dna
sretupmoC
stcudorP
latemdetacirbaF
tnempiuqe
noitacinummoC
stcudorP
nedooW
scimarecdna
tnemec
,ssalG
gniniM tnempiuqe
dnayrenihcaM
citsalpdna
rebbuR
elitxeT evitomotuA tnempiuqEnoitatropsnarT stcudorP
muelorteP
erutinruF ecapsoreA lerappA
High
Low
Global innovations (11) Resource-intensive (5)
Regional processing (4) Labor-intensive (3)
Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart V.1.2: GVC – Forward and Backward Participation
a: Backward Participation b: Forward Participation
Note: (1) The analysis is based on a five-year average of the variables. GVC participation and factors exhibit more variation in a five-year span compared to year-on-year
variation.
(2) The dependent variable is average backward or forward participation in logarithmic terms. The variable “distance” is the distance from the GVC hub, i.e., the
average distance of the country from China, the US and Germany. Resources/GDP represents rent from resources as a ratio of gross domestic product and
DIC represents domestic industrial capacity.
(3) The slope coefficients of the determinants are shown as bars in the chart. Regression coefficients with *, ** and *** reflects significance at 1, per cent, 5 per
cent and 10 per cent, respectively.
Source: UNCTAD (Eora); and RBI staff estimates.
References:
Ignatenko, A., F. Raei and B. Mircheva (2019), “Global Value
Baldwin, R. (2011), “Trade and Industrialisation after
Chains: What are the Benefits and Why Do Countries
Globalisation’s 2nd Unbundling: How Building and Joining
Participate?”, IMF Working Papers, WP/19/18.
a Supply Chain are Different and Why It Matters”, NBER
Working Paper 17716. Mckinsey Global Institute (2020), Risk, Resilience and
Rebalancing in Global Value Chains.
Fernandes, A., H. L. Kee and D. Winkler (2020),
“Determinants of Global Value Chain Participation: Cross- World Trade Organization (2020), Export Prohibitions and
Country Evidence”, World Bank. Restrictions.
V.2 Commodity Prices and Inflation
since February before witnessing some uptick
Global commodity prices fell sharply in March-April,
in June on the back of rising vegetable oil, dairy
with oil prices plunging to record lows as lockdowns
products and sugar prices. Excess stockpiles amidst
across countries depressed demand. From May,
weakening external demand, diminishing restaurant
however, prices recovered as demand prospects
sales and reduced demand from food manufacturers
improved following the gradual withdrawal of
resulting from COVID-19 restrictions, pulled down
lockdown restrictions. The Bloomberg commodity
prices for most food products between February
price index increased by 14.5 per cent between April
and May. However, since June, food prices have
and September.
edged up as global import demand improved, while
The food price index of the Food and Agriculture export supplies tightened due to weather shocks
Organization (FAO) increased by 1.0 per cent and production slowdown across major producing
between April and August. Global food prices eased countries (Chart V.3a).

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.3: Commodity Prices
a: FAO Food Price Indices b: Energy and Crude Oil Prices
Source: Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO); and World Bank.
Crude oil prices plunged in March-April, with West Base metal prices, measured by the Bloomberg’s base
Texas Intermediate (WTI) prices falling below zero metal spot index, increased by 27.5 per cent between
to US$ (-)37.63 per barrel on April 20, 2020, as the April and September 2020 as against a decline of 19.3
unprecedented shock due to COVID-19 amidst the per cent in Q1 and regained all the losses incurred
escalating Saudi-Russia price war over production after the outbreak of COVID-19. Most industrial metal
cuts, flooded the oil market with excess supply. Crude prices have exhibited bullish movements since April-
oil prices have increased since then, recouping April May, underpinned by China’s restocking due to its
losses, as optimism on demand following gradual early recovery and the massive stimulus packages by
withdrawal of lockdown in some countries and global central banks. Gold prices remained elevated,
continued production cut by major energy producers increasing by almost 24.3 per cent on a year-to-date
buoyed sentiments. Major oil producers, both inside (YTD) basis (till September 30, 2020) as heightened
and outside the Organization of the Petroleum uncertainties and highly accommodative policies of
central banks continue to boost the safe haven appeal
Exporting Countries (OPEC) planned to partially
of the yellow metal, pushing prices above the US$ 2000
restore production from August following the cuts
mark in early August. However, the bullion witnessed
agreed to in the OPEC plus agreement of April, and
sell-offs in mid-August on Russia’s announcement of
this kept oil price range bound in July. Oil price firmed
potential vaccine and profit booking by investors and
up for the larger part of August on news of falling
have remained broadly range bound for larger part of
inventories and recovery in fuel demand. However,
September before falling by 3.3 per cent in last week
the rally lost steam in September as fears of a second
on strong US dollar and flight to cash (Chart V.4).
wave of COVID-19 infections, lack of visibility of
the expected demand recovery and ramping up of CPI inflation remained largely benign in major AEs,
production by some smaller OPEC members changed but exhibited modest upticks in some EMEs since
expectations again (Chart V.3b). June. Barring India, inflation remained at sub-target

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart V.4: Metal Price Indices
Source: Bloomberg.
levels in most of the AEs and EMEs, reflecting subdued In the US, inflation measured by the personal
demand amid lockdowns (Table V.3). consumer expenditures (PCE) price index eased
during February-June on the back of subdued
Table V.3: Inflation Performance
aggregate demand and lower consumer energy prices.
(Per cent)
Although it has edged up since June, the pick up has
Country Target Q2-2019 Q3-2019 Q4-2019 Q1-2020 Q2-2020
Advanced Economies been modest and drawing strength from the recovery
Canada 2.0 2.1 1.9 2.1 1.8 0.0 in spending for consumer goods and services due
Euro area 2.0 1.4 0.9 1.0 1.1 0.2
to resumption of activities. Notwithstanding the
Japan 2.0 0.8 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.1
South Korea 2.0 0.7 0.1 0.3 1.2 -0.1 increase, the PCE price index based inflation remained
UK 2.0 2.0 1.8 1.4 1.7 0.6
US 2.0 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.7 0.6 well below the Fed’s 2 per cent target. In the Euro area
Emerging Market Economies too, actual inflation remained much below the target
Brazil 4.0 ± 1.5 4.3 3.2 3.4 3.8 2.1 as prices have edged down since March and inflation
Russia 4.0 5.0 4.3 3.4 2.4 3.1
rate slipped below zero since August on falling prices
India 4.0 ± 2.0 3.1 3.5 5.8 6.7 6.2
South Africa 3.0-6.0 4.5 4.1 3.8 4.4 2.4 of energy products and non-energy industrial goods.
Indonesia 3.0 ± 1.0 3.1 3.4 2.9 2.9 2.3
Philippines 3.0 ± 1.0 3.0 1.7 1.5 2.7 2.3 In Japan, CPI inflation remained subdued, despite a
Thailand 1.0-3.0 1.1 0.6 0.4 0.4 -2.7
slight uptick in July, on weak core consumer prices
Notes: (1) The ECB aims at inflation rates of below, but close to, 2% over and inflation expectations. In the UK, rising prices of
the medium term. The Federal Reserve in August 2020 adopted
a new policy strategy of ‘average inflation targeting’ under recreation and culture activities led to an increase in
which it would allow the inflation rate to go above the target
of 2 per cent rate for brief periods to make up for the shortfall CPI inflation in June-July; however, inflation edged
from the targets in earlier periods. Central Bank of Canada aims
to keep inflation at the 2 per cent mid-point of an inflation down in August on easing meal prices led by the ‘Eat
control target range of 1-3 per cent.
(2) Brazil’s, Indonesia’s and Thailand’s inflation target for 2019
Out to Help Out’ scheme by the Government, falling
were 4.25 ± 1.5 per cent, 3.5 ± 1 per cent and 2.5 ± 1.5 per
cent, respectively.
air fares and clothing prices (Chart V.5a).
(3) Quarterly inflation numbers are monthly averages.
(4) India’s inflation is based on calendar year basis. Data for
Q2:2020 refer to June only as NSO did not provide inflation CPI inflation across major EMEs eased during March-
rates for April and May.
Sources: Central Bank Websites; and Thomson Reuters. May on weak demand and depressed global crude

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.5: CPI Inflation (y-o-y) – Select Economies
a: Advanced Economies b: Emerging Market Economies
Source: Bloomberg.
oil prices, but has recorded modest increases since V.3 Monetary Policy Stance
June. Nonetheless, it remained below pre-COVID-19
With the onset of the pandemic, fiscal authorities
levels and even below central bank targets for some
around the world have unveiled stimulus packages
economies. In China, consumer price inflation edged
to overcome the downturn. Estimates as of mid-June
up in June-July on higher food prices resulting from
2020 by the IMF show more aggressive support by
an increase in pork prices and supply disruptions
the AEs (Table V.4). Central banks have also provided
caused by floods. However, it fell in August as supply
disruptions eased, restoring demand-supply balance.
Table V.4: Fiscal Support in Response to COVID-19
In Brazil, CPI inflation has recorded modest gains since
(Amount in US$ billion; Per cent as proportion of GDP)
June on the back of rising prices for transportation,
Country Amount Per cent
increasing housing prices and cost of health and
Advanced Economies - 19.8
personal care, but remains below the central bank’s
Canada 137 8.9
target. CPI inflation in South Africa started picking up
European Union 484 4.1
in June and moved back into the central bank’s target Japan 1720 35.4
UK 578 23.0
range of 3-6 per cent since July, primarily driven by high
US 2953 14.8
prices of food and beverages. CPI inflation in Russia,
Emerging Market Economies - 5.1
unlike its peers, has been increasing since March, with
Brazil 157 11.9
only a modest drop in May. Increasing food, non-food China 705 4.6
India 180 6.1
and services prices amidst supply disruptions and the
Indonesia 40 3.6
gradual release in pent-up demand as also weak ruble,
Russia 40 2.9
supported the uptrend. However, inflation remains South Africa 26 9.6
Thailand 61 11.8
below the central bank’s target of 4 per cent through
Source: WEO Update, June 2020, IMF.
September (Chart V.5b).

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
unprecedented monetary accommodation. The key and moderately exceeds it for some time. In Q3,
policy rates are at their lowest level in most countries. the Fed increased the duration and made favourable
One important difference is that while the AE central changes to the scope as also pricing of several facilities
banks used up the limited policy space available announced in March/ April in response to COVID-19.
to them in March, the EMEs continued to cut rates Some facilities1 that were to expire in September
through Q2 and Q3 of 2020. have been extended up to December 2020, while
the temporary US dollar liquidity swap lines and the
In August 2020, following a comprehensive and a
temporary repurchase agreement facility for foreign
public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools
and international monetary authorities (FIMA repo
and communication practices, the Federal Reserve
facility) have been extended up to March 2021.
announced its new monetary policy strategy under
which it seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 per The European Central Bank (ECB) has not changed
cent over time. As per this ‘flexible average inflation key rates in response to the pandemic so far. In its
targeting’ paradigm, the Fed would allow the inflation April 2020 meeting, the ECB eased conditions for
rate to be moderately above the 2 per cent rate for brief accessing targeted longer-term refinancing operations
periods to make up for the shortfall from the target (TLTRO III) and introduced a new series of non-
in earlier periods. Furthermore, according primacy to targeted pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing
maximum employment, the Fed would henceforth operations (PELTROs) to support liquidity conditions
respond to ‘shortfalls’ of the employment from its in the euro area financial system. In its June meeting,
maximum level rather than its ‘deviations’. the ECB expanded the envelope for the pandemic
emergency purchase programme (PEPP) by 600 billion
As regards the actual conduct of monetary policy, the
(about US$ 680 billion)2 to a total of 1,350 billion
US Fed has maintained a pause on the target range of
(about US$ 1,531 billion), while also extending
the policy rate in all Federal Open Market Committee
the time horizon for net purchases under the
(FOMC) meetings since the emergency rate cut in mid-
programme to June 2021. There were no new
March. In April 2020, the Fed announced the Main
announcements in the two meetings in Q3.
Street Lending Programme, a package of support for
households and businesses, worth US$ 2.3 trillion. The Bank of Japan (BoJ) has also not changed key
Since June, the Fed has indicated that it would continue rates in response to the pandemic. In April, the BoJ
asset purchases at the current pace over the coming announced significant enhancement of monetary
months to sustain smooth market functioning. In its easing including removing the limit of 80 trillion yen
September meeting, the first after the adoption of the (about US$ 746 billion) on additional annual holdings
new monetary policy framework, the Fed stated that of government bonds. The limits on additional
it would keep the target range for the federal funds purchases of commercial papers and corporate bonds
rate at 0-0.25 per cent till labour conditions become were enhanced. The BoJ also strengthened the Special
consistent with the FOMC’s assessment of maximum Funds-Supplying Operations to facilitate financing in
employment and inflation has risen to 2 per cent response to COVID-19. In May, it introduced a new
1 These include the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility, the
Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, and the
Main Street Lending Program.
2 The US$ approximations for all the amounts mentioned in another currency in this Chapter are based on the exchange rate prevailing on the date/month
of announcement of the particular measure.

Chapter V External Environment
measure under these operations for fund provisioning purchase facility. The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA)
against interest-free and unsecured loans. The maintained the targets for the cash rate and the yield
maximum amount of financing under the Special on 3-year Australian Government bonds at 25 basis
Funds Supplying Operations is about 100 trillion yen points each in its monthly meetings held during Q2
(about US$ 933 billion). and Q3 of 2020. In September, the RBA announced an
increase in the size of its term funding facility and
The Bank of England (BoE) has maintained a pause
extended it up to June 2021. The Reserve Bank of
on the Bank Rate, which is at its all-time low of 0.1
New Zealand (RBNZ) maintained its policy rate at its
per cent since March 2020. In its June meeting,
historic low of 0.25 per cent in each of its meetings
however, the BoE increased the target stock of
since April. The RBNZ, however, increased the limit
purchase of UK government bonds by an additional
on its large scale asset purchase programme from
£100 billion (about US$ 124 billion), taking the stock
of total asset purchases to £745 billion (about US$ 926 NZ$ 30 billion (about US$ 17 billion) to NZ$ 33 billion
billion) for 2020. There were no new announcements (about US$ 20 billion) in April, to NZ$ 60 billion (about
in its meetings held in Q3. US$ 36 billion) in May and further to NZ$ 100 billion
(about US$ 66 billion) in August.
The Bank of Canada (BoC) has maintained a pause on
the policy rate at 0.25 per cent since March. In April, The central banks of South Korea and Norway were
the BoC announced new measures for provincial the only two AE central banks to effect a rate cut
bond and corporate bond purchases, a temporary beyond Q1:2020. Both reduced their policy rate by
increase in weekly purchases of Treasury bills and 25 bps each in May to 0.5 per cent and 0 per cent,
enhancement of funding under term repo facility to respectively (Chart V.6a). The Swedish Riksbank
two years. In June, with improvement in short-term maintained its policy rate at 0 per cent, but in its June
funding conditions, the BoC reduced the frequency meeting it increased the amount of asset purchases
of term repo operations and its bankers’ acceptance from SEK 300 billion (about US$ 30 billion) to SEK
Chart V.6: Policy Rate Changes – Select Major Economies
a: Advanced Economies b: Emerging Market Economies
Note: The policy rate changes are mapped to the time when the decision was announced and not when it took effect.
Source: Bloomberg.

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
500 billion (about US$ 54 billion) and extended the of Mexico cut its policy rate by 50 bps in each month
time period of the purchases up to June 2021, while of Q2:2020 and effected 50 bps cut in August and
also announcing purchase of corporate bonds from another 25 bps cut in September. Bank Indonesia cut
September onwards. its policy rate by 25 bps each in June and July and
has maintained a pause since August. Amongst other
EMEs, on the other hand, continued to cut rates well
major EME central banks, the Bank of Thailand and
into Q3. The People’s Bank of China (PBoC) effected
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas cut their rates in Q2 while
a 20 bps cut in the one-year Loan Prime Rate (LPR)
Bank Negara Malaysia and the Central Bank of Sri
to 3.85 per cent in April and has maintained a pause
Lanka reduced rates in both Q2 and Q3.
since. Prior to the policy decision in April, the PBoC
had reduced the interest rate on excess reserves to V.4 Global Financial Markets
a record low of 0.35 per cent, while also reducing
Global financial markets went into a tailspin in March
the reserve requirement ratio for smaller banks by
that continued up to March 23, 2020 when the US
one per cent. In May, the PBoC lowered the reserve
Federal Reserve announced extensive measures to
requirement rate for all large financial institutions by
support the economy, including removing the upper
another 150 basis points to 11 per cent.
bound on its asset purchases. The announcements
Other BRICS central banks remained in accommodative engendered a recovery in financial markets across the
mode. The central bank of Brazil reduced the Selic rate world. Aided by equally extensive and in some cases,
by 75 bps each in May and June, following it up with co-ordinated monetary policy action by central banks,
a 25 bps cut in August as inflation remained below financing conditions have improved.
the target. The central bank of Brazil took a pause in Among AEs, the US equity market has continued to
its September meeting, the first after nine consecutive recover from the slide in March, with intermittent
rate cuts since August 2019. The Bank of Russia cut its corrections. In July, equity indices moved higher on
policy rate by 50 bps, 100 bps and 25 bps in April, June prospects of successful development of a vaccine and
and July, respectively before pausing in September. better than expected corporate performance. Towards
The South African Reserve Bank cut its policy rate by the end of July, there was some correction due to
100 bps, 50 bps and 25 bps in April, May and July, resurgence of infections and increasing tensions
respectively, as overall risks to inflation outlook with China, but the exceptional performance of the
remained balanced and took a pause in September prime technology companies helped in overriding
(Chart V.6b). the pessimism. In August, the S&P 500 index closed
at all-time highs on seven occasions. It peaked
The central bank of Turkey cut its policy rate by 100
further in early September followed by correction,
bps in April and 50 bps in May and maintained a pause
with shares of technology companies registering a
thereafter. In August, the central bank increased the
large decrease.
Turkish Lira and forex reserve requirement ratios
for banks fulfilling real credit growth conditions. In the other major AEs, even as stock indices have
In September, however, the central bank increased been rising gradually, they are yet to recover year-
its policy rate by 200 bps to restore the disinflation to-date losses. In the Euro area, despite news on the
process and support price stability. The central bank finalisation of the Next Generation EU fund3, the stock
3 In July, the European Council has agreed on the Next Generation EU (NGEU) fund, under which 750 billion will be borrowed on the capital markets and
spent only to address the challenges/consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. Spending will commence in 2021, of which 390 billion will be in the form
of grants. The debt issuance will end by 2026 and repayment will be scheduled until 2058.

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.7: Equity Markets
a:Equity Indices (MSCI) b: Change in Equity Indices
Sources: Bloomberg; and RBI staff estimates.
market remained flat with differential pace of opening unprecedented policy accommodation and continuing
of multiple economies and localised resurgence of safe haven demand. There has been some hardening
infections. The uptrend in the stock market in the UK of yields in Q3 in the AEs, particularly in August,
was even more gradual, with the country registering mainly on account of mixed news on the economic
the worst economic contraction among major AEs. front (Chart V.8a). With renewed virus concerns,
The stalemate over Brexit negotiations has dampened safe haven demand for US Treasuries has resurged.
sentiment on the outlook. Japanese stocks also slowly Yields in EMEs, on the other hand, have witnessed
recovered from the slide in the earlier part of the year considerable softening since Q2:2020 after the rout in
in Q2, and thereafter the index has almost stalled. the earlier part of the year. This has been on the back
In the second half of September, stock markets in of large monetary loosening, including bond purchase
the Euro area and UK corrected further with rising programmes undertaken by a few EME central banks.
possibility of a second wave of infections and need China has, on the contrary, seen a rise in yields after
for lockdown.
the pause following the 20 bps cut in policy rate in
Stock markets in EMEs have seen rapid recovery, April.
starting from Q2 (Chart V.7). Risk-on sentiments
In currency markets, the US dollar has weakened
following massive monetary accommodation by
considerably since March 23, 2020. Expectations of
central banks led to resumption of capital flows to
the policy rates staying low for a considerable time
EMEs, which have strengthened further in Q3. In
horizon, largest number of COVID-19 infections and
September, however, stock markets in EMEs have also
fatalities in the world, grim employment news and
corrected on global cues.
tensions with China have imparted weakness to the
The flight to cash phase in bond yields ended on US dollar (Chart V.8b). The euro has strengthened
March 23, 2020. Thereafter, yields softened in AEs considerably against the dollar. With resumption of
and remained range-bound in Q2, in part due to the capital flows, most emerging market currencies have

Monetary Policy Report October 2020
Chart V.8: Bond Yields and Currency Movements
a: 10-year Sovereign Bond Yields in Select AEs b: Currency Indices
Sources: Bloomberg.
strengthened since Q2:2020. However, the US dollar economic activity may be beginning to bottom out
strengthened in September on safe haven demand in Q3, the near-term outlook remains hostage to the
as waning vaccine optimism amidst rising infections virus and attendant uncertainty around the discovery
in Europe and the UK and uncertainty regarding US of the vaccine. The slight uptick in inflation of some
stimulus package triggered risk-off sentiments. The EMEs in recent months notwithstanding, risks to the
MSCI Emerging Market Currency Index increased by recovery remain on the downside due to the sizeable
1.6 per cent in Q2:2020 and by a further 2.7 per cent aggregate demand compression effect and continued
in Q3:2020. disruption of supply. As major central banks have
pledged to keep rates at the current historic low
V.5 Conclusion
levels and governments are implementing large fiscal
In sum, the global economy is still reeling under support programmes, the improvement in financing
the impact of the unprecedented COVID-19 shock. conditions that is still unfolding should impart upside
Even as high frequency indicators suggest that the to the recovery when it takes hold.