Published under Section 45ZM of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
Monetary Policy Report
APRIL 2020
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai
Contents
Chapter I: Macroeconomic Outlook 1
I.1 : The Outlook for Inflation 4
I.2 : The Outlook for Growth 6
I.3 : Balance of Risks 10
I.4 : Conclusion 11
Box I.1: Forecasting Under Uncertainty in a Cyclical Downturn 8
Chapter II: Prices and Costs 12
II.1 : Consumer Prices 13
II.2 : Drivers of Inflation 15
II.3 : Costs 25
II.4 : Conclusion 28
Box: II.1: Onion Price Shock – Issues in Supply Management 19
Chapter III: Demand and Output 29
III.1 : Aggregate Demand 29
III.2 : Aggregate Supply 42
III.3 : Output Gap 47
III.4 : Conclusion 48
Box III.1: Media Sentiments on Economic Growth - A Machine Learning Approach 31
Box III.2: What Ails Rural Demand? 34
Box III.3: Augmenting Quarterly Projection Model (QPM): Fiscal Block 38
Chapter IV: Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions 49
IV.1 : Domestic Financial Markets 49
IV.2 : Monetary Policy Transmission 65
IV.3 : Liquidity Management and the Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy 70
IV.4 : Conclusion 75
Box IV.1: Estimating Term Premium and its Determinants 54
Box IV.2: Revised Liquidity Management Framework 70
Box IV.3: Liquidity Measures to Combat Adverse Impact of COVID-19 71
Chapter V: External Environment 76
V.1 : Global Economic Conditions 76
V.2 : Commodity Prices and Inflation 82
V.3 : Monetary Policy Stance 86
V.4 : Global Financial Markets 88
V.5 : Conclusion 90
Box V.1: Impact of COVID-19 on Global Growth 78
Box V.2: What Drives Gold Prices? 84
i
ABBREVIATIONS
ACM - Adrian, Crump and Moench CF - Christiano-Fitzgerald
ADB - Asian Development Bank CiC - Currency in Circulation
AE - Advance Estimates CII - Confederation of Indian Industry
AEs - Advanced Economies CLI - Composite Leading Indicator
AL - Agricultural Labourers CMBs - Cash Management Bills
AMCs - Asset Management Companies COMEX - Commodity Exchange
ANFC - Adjusted Non-Food Bank Credit COVID-19 - Coronavirus Disease 2019
APEDA - Agricultural and Processed Food CP - Commercial Paper
Products Export Development
CPB - Central Planning Bureau
Authority
CPC - Central Pay Commission
ARCH - Autoregressive Conditional
Heteroscedasticity CPI - Consumer Price Index
ARCH-LM - Autoregressive Conditional CPI-AL - Consumer Price Index for
Heteroscedasticity - Lagrange Agricultural Labourers
Multiplier
CPI-IW - Consumer Price Index for Industrial
BK - Baxter-King Workers
BE - Budget Estimates CPI-RL - Consumer Price Index for Rural
Labourers
BIS - Bank for International Settlements
CRAR - Capital to Risk Weighted Assets Ratio
BoC - Bank of Canada
CRR - Cash Reserve Ratio
BoE - Bank of England
CU - Capacity Utilisation
BoJ - Bank of Japan
BoM - Bureau of Meteorology CU (SA) - Capacity Utilisation
(Seasonally Adjusted)
Bps - Basis Points
DCA - Department of Consumer Affairs
BRICS - Brazil, Russia, India, China and
South Africa DGCA - Directorate General of Civil Aviation
BS - Bharat Stage DGCI&S - Directorate General of Commercial
Intelligence and Statistics
CAD - Current Account Deficit
ECB - European Central Bank
CBLO - Collateralised Borrowing and
Lending Obligation ECBs - External Commercial Borrowings
CCIL - Clearing Corporation of India Limited ECM - Error Correction Model
CD - Certificate of Deposit EMEs - Emerging Market Economies
CDS - Credit Default Swap e-NAM - National Agriculture Market
iiiiii
Monetary Policy Report April 2020
ENSO - El Nino – Southern Oscillation GoI - Government of India
EPU - Economic Policy Uncertainty GSDP - Gross State Domestic Product
ETF - Exchange Traded Fund G-Secs - Government Securities
EU - European Union GST - Goods and Services Tax
FAO - Food and Agriculture Organisation GVA - Gross Value Added
FBIL - Financial Benchmarks India Pvt. Ltd H1 - First Half of the Year
FDI - Foreign Direct Investment H2 - Second Half of the Year
FIs - Financial Institutions HAC - Heteroscedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent
FICCI - Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry HP - Hodrick-Prescott
FIMA - Foreign and International Monetary HTM - Held to Maturity
Authorities
IIP - Index of Industrial Production
FIMMDA - Fixed Income Money Market and
IL&FS - Infrastructure Leasing & Financial
Derivatives Association of India
Services Limited
FOMC - Federal Open Market Committee
IMF - International Monetary Fund
FPAS - Forecasting and Policy Analysis
INR - Indian Rupee
System
IOCL - Indian Oil Corporation Limited
FPI - Foreign Portfolio Investor
IOS - Industrial Outlook Survey
FRBM - Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management ISM - Institute for Supply Management
FRE - First Revised Estimates J-REIT - Japan Real Estate Investment Trust
F-TRAC - FIMMDA Trade Reporting and LAF - Liquidity Adjustment Facility
Confirmation System
LB - Ljung-Box
GDP - Gross Domestic Product
LPG - Liquefied Petroleum Gas
GDS - Gross Domestic Saving
LPR - Loan Prime Rate
GEPU - Global Economic Policy Uncertainty
LTROs - Long Term Repo Operations /Longer-
Index
term Refinancing Operations
GFC - Global Financial Crisis
MCLR - Marginal Cost of Funds Based
GFCE - Government Final Consumption Lending Rate
Expenditure
MEP - Minimum Export Price
GFCF - Gross Fixed Capital Formation
MFs - Mutual Funds
GFD - Gross Fiscal Deficit
MGNREGA - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
GNDI - Gross National Disposable Income Employment Guarantee Act
iivv
Abbreviations
MIBOR - Mumbai Interbank Outright Rate NSSO - National Sample Survey Office
MMRP - Modified Mixed Reference Period OD - Overdraft
MOAFW - Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers OECD - Organisation for Economic
Welfare Cooperation and Development
m-o-m - Month-on-Month OIS - Overnight Indexed Swap
MPC - Monetary Policy Committee OLS - Ordinary Least Squares
MPR - Monetary Policy Report OMCs - Oil Marketing Companies
MS - Mild Steel OMOs - Open Market Operations
MSCI - Morgan Stanley Capital International OPEC - Organisation of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries
MSF - Marginal Standing Facility
OTC - Over-the-Counter
MSME - Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises PADO - Public Administration, Defence and
Other services
MSP - Minimum Support Price
PBoC - People’s Bank of China
MVKF - Multivariate Kalman Filter
PCE - Personal Consumption Expenditure
NAV - Net Asset Value
PDS - Public Distribution System
NBFCs - Non-Banking Financial Companies
PEPP - Pandemic Emergency Purchase
NCAER - National Council of Applied
Programme
Economic Research
PFCE - Private Final Consumption
NDS-OM - Negotiated Dealing System-Order
Expenditure
Matching
PLFS - Periodic Labour Force Survey
NDTL - Net Demand and Time Liabilities
PMI - Purchasing Managers’ Index
NEER - Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
POL - Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants
NGNF - Non-Government Non-Financial
PSBs - Public Sector Banks
NLP - Natural Language Processing
PSU - Public Sector Undertaking
NOAA - National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Q1 - First Quarter
Administration
Q2 - Second Quarter
NPA - Non-Performing Asset
Q3 - Third Quarter
NSC - National Savings Certificate
Q4 - Fourth Quarter
NSDL - National Securities Depository
Limited q-o-q - Quarter-on-Quarter
NSE - National Stock Exchange QPM - Quarterly Projection Model
NSO - National Statistical Office RBA - Reserve Bank of Australia
vv
Monetary Policy Report April 2020
RBI - Reserve Bank of India ToT - Terms of Trade
RE - Revised Estimates UK - United Kingdom
REER - Real Effective Exchange Rate US - United States
RHS - Right Hand Side US$ - US Dollar
RL - Rural Labourers VAR - Vector Autoregression
SAAR - Seasonally Adjusted Annualised VAT - Value Added Tax
Growth Rate
WAC - Weighted Average Coupon
SAE - Second Advanced Estimates
WACR - Weighted Average Call Money Rate
SCBs - Scheduled Commercial Banks
WADR - Weighted Average Discount Rate
SDLs - State Development Loans
WADTDR - Weighted Average Domestic Term
SEBI - Securities and Exchange Board of India
Deposit Rate
SI - Sentiment Index
WALR - Weighted Average Lending Rate
SIAM - Society of Indian Automobile
WAM - Weighted Average Maturity
Manufacturers
WHO - World Health Organisation
SLR - Statutory Liquidity Ratio
WMA - Ways and Means Advances
SPDs - Standalone Primary Dealers
WPI - Wholesale Price Index
SSTs - Sea Surface Temperatures
WTI - West Texas Intermediate
T-Bill - Treasury Bill
WTO - World Trade Organisation
TLTRO - Targeted Longer-term Refinancing
Operations y-o-y - Year-on-Year
vvii
I. Macroeconomic Outlook
The global macroeconomic outlook is overcast with the COVID-19 pandemic, with massive dislocations in global
production, supply chains, trade and tourism. Financial markets across the world are experiencing extreme volatility;
global commodity prices, especially of crude oil, have declined sharply. COVID-19 would impact economic activity
in India directly due to lockdowns, and through second round effects operating through global trade and growth.
The impact of COVID-19 on inflation is ambiguous, with a possible decline in food prices likely to be offset by
potential cost-push increases in prices of non-food items due to supply disruptions.
As this Monetary Policy Report (MPR) goes for release, G20 finance ministers and central bank governors have
the global macroeconomic outlook is overcast with committed to use all available policy tools to deal with
the COVID-19 pandemic. With over 12 lakh confirmed COVID-19. G20 Leaders have resolved to do whatever
infections and over 67,000 deaths across 211 it takes to overcome the pandemic. The International
countries as of April 7, 2020 and counting, the sheer Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank Group are
scale and speed of the unfolding human tragedy is making available US$ 50 billion and US$ 14 billion,
overwhelming. The disruption of economic activity in
respectively, through various financing facilities to
a wide swathe of affected countries is set to intensify
their membership to help them respond to the crisis.
in the face of headwinds in the form of massive
Turning to the domestic economy, India has not been
dislocations in global production, supply chains, trade
spared from the exponential spread of COVID-19 and
and tourism. Global output is now seen as contracting
by April 7, more than 4,700 cases had been reported.
in 2020. Financial markets across the world are
While efforts are being mounted on a war footing to
experiencing extreme volatility: equity markets
arrest its spread, COVID-19 would impact economic
recorded sharp sell-offs, with volatility touching
activity in India directly through domestic lockdown.
levels seen during the global financial crisis; flights
to safety have taken down sovereign bond yields to Second round effects would operate through a
record lows; risk spreads have widened; and financial severe slowdown in global trade and growth. More
conditions have tightened. Global commodity prices, immediately, spillovers are being transmitted through
especially of crude oil, have also declined sharply in finance and confidence channels to domestic financial
anticipation of weakening global demand on the one markets. These effects and their interactions would
hand, and the failed negotiations of the Organisation inevitably accentuate the growth slowdown, which
of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and started in Q1:2018-19 and continued through H2:2019-
Russia, on the other. 20. Meanwhile, headline inflation stayed above the
upper tolerance band of the inflation target band
Many central banks have eased monetary, liquidity
during December 2019-February 2020, led by a spike
and regulatory policies to support domestic demand,
including through emergency off-cycle meetings. in vegetable prices. While it has peaked and vegetable
Bilateral swap lines between some central banks prices are on the ebb, the impact of COVID-19 on
that were deployed during the global financial crisis inflation is ambiguous relative to that on growth, with
have been activated. G7 finance ministers and central a possible decline in prices of food items being offset
bank governors have stated that they stand ready to by potential cost-push increases in prices of non-food
cooperate further on timely and effective measures. items due to supply disruptions.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Monetary Policy Committee: October 2019-March of 75 bps and 2 members voted for a reduction of
2020 50 bps). During February-March 2020, the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) also undertook several measures
During October 2019-March 2020, the monetary
to further improve liquidity, monetary transmission
policy committee (MPC) met four times. The meeting
and credit flows to the economy, and provide relief on
scheduled for March 31, April 1 and 3, 2020 was
debt servicing (Chapter IV).
advanced to March 24, 26 and 27, 2020. In its October
2019 meeting, the MPC had noted that the continuing The MPC’s voting pattern reflects the differences in
slowdown warranted intensified efforts to restore individual members’ assessments, expectations and
the growth momentum. With inflation expected policy preferences, as also reflected in MPCs in other
to remain below target in the remaining period of central banks (Table I.1).
2019-20 and Q1:2020-21, the MPC took the view that
Macroeconomic Outlook
policy space could be used to address growth concerns
within the flexible inflation targeting mandate. Chapters II and III analyse macroeconomic
Accordingly, it voted to reduce the policy repo rate developments during October 2019-March 2020
by 25 basis points (bps) to 5.15 per cent (5 members and explain the deviations of inflation and growth
voted for a reduction of 25 bps and one member voted outcomes from projections. Turning to the outlook,
for a reduction of 40 bps), and committed to continue the evolution of key macroeconomic and financial
with an accommodative stance as long as necessary to variables over the past six months warrants revisions
revive growth, while ensuring that inflation remained in the baseline assumptions (Table I.2).
within the target. First, international crude oil prices (Indian basket)
have fluctuated in a wide range since the October
The MPC decided to hold the policy rate unchanged in
2019 MPR. These prices initially increased during
its December 2019 and February 2020 meetings. While
late December 2019 and early January 2020 to around
domestic demand conditions weakened further in the
run-up to these meetings, inflation rose sharply and
Table I.1: Monetary Policy Committees and
breached the upper tolerance level of the mandated
Voting Patterns
inflation band in November and December 2019. Given
Country Policy Meetings: October 2019 - March 2020
the evolving growth-inflation dynamics, the MPC felt
Total Meetings Meetings with Meetings with
it appropriate to maintain status quo, although it Full Consensus Dissents
voted to persevere with the accommodative stance as Brazil 4 4 0
Chile 5 4 1
long as necessary to revive growth, given the space
Colombia 4 4 0
available for future policy action.
Czech Republic 5 2 3
Hungary 5 5 0
In its off-cycle meeting in March, the MPC noted that
Israel 4 0 4
macroeconomic risks brought on by the pandemic Japan 4 0 4
could be severe, both on the demand and supply South Africa 3 2 1
Sweden 3 2 1
sides, and stressed upon the need to do whatever is
Thailand 5 3 2
necessary to shield the domestic economy from the
UK 6 3 3
pandemic. The MPC reduced the policy repo rate by 75 US 5 3 2
bps to 4.4 per cent (4 members voted for a reduction Sources: Central bank websites.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
early March in anticipation of lower global demand
Table I.2: Baseline Assumptions for Projections
following the outbreak of COVID-19 and its rapid
Indicator MPR October 2019 MPR April 2020
geographical spread. Brent prices crashed to US$ 32
Crude Oil US$ 62.6 per barrel US$ 35 per barrel
on March 9, 2020 following Saudi Arabia’s decision to
(Indian basket) during H2: 2019-20 during 2020-21
cut prices and increase production over the failure to
Exchange rate ` 71.3/US$ ` 75/US$
reach an agreement with Russia on production cuts.
Monsoon 10 per cent above Normal for 2020
long period average Brent fell further to US$ 23 on March 30, 2020 while
for 2019
US crude prices dipped briefly below US$ 20. Brent
Global growth 3.2 per cent in 2019 Contraction in 2020
rebounded to US$ 34 per barrel on April 3. Given
3.5 per cent in 2020
the current demand-supply assessment, the baseline
Fiscal deficit To remain within BE To remain within BE scenario assumes crude oil prices (Indian basket)
(per cent of GDP) 2019-20 2020-21
Centre: 3.3 Centre: 3.5 to average around US$ 35 per barrel during 2020-21
Combined: 5.9 Combined: 6.1
(Chart I.1).
Domestic macroeconomic/ No major change No major change
structural policies during Second, the nominal exchange rate (the Indian rupee
the forecast period
or INR vis-à-vis the US dollar) exhibited sizable two-way
Notes: 1. The Indian basket of crude oil represents a derived numeraire
movements during October-December 2019. The INR
comprising sour grade (Oman and Dubai average) and sweet
grade (Brent) crude oil. came under intensified and sustained depreciation
2. The exchange rate path assumed here is for the purpose of
generating the baseline projections and does not indicate any pressures beginning mid-January, reflecting a
‘view’ on the level of the exchange rate. The Reserve Bank of
generalised weakening of emerging market currencies
India is guided by the objective of containing excessive volatility
in the foreign exchange market and not by any specific level of amidst flights to safety. Accordingly, the baseline
and/or band around the exchange rate.
assumes an average of INR 75 per US dollar to reflect
3. BE: Budget estimates.
4. Combined fiscal deficit refers to that of the Centre and States these recent developments.
taken together.
Sources: RBI estimates; Budget documents; and IMF.
Third, even though uncertainties relating to US-
US$ 70 per barrel, triggered by US-Iran tensions. They China trade relations and Brexit have receded,
subsequently softened, however, to reach US$ 51 by the COVID-19 pandemic has taken over. This has
Chart I.1: Crude Oil: Demand-Supply Balance and Prices
a: Crude Oil: Global Demand and Supply b: Brent Prices
Source: International Energy Agency. Source: Bloomberg.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
cast a shadow on the macroeconomic outlook,
Chart I.2: Inflation Expectations of Households
with global supply chains, trade, tourism, and the
hotel industry being severely affected. The World
Trade Organisation’s (WTO) goods and services
trade barometers indicate that world trade volume
growth weakened in early 2020; it is expected to
be debilitated further by the adverse impact of
COVID-19. The IMF expects that the contraction in
global output in 2020 could be as bad as or worse
than in 2009. The depth of the recession and the
pace of recovery in 2021 would depend on the speed
of containment of the pandemic and the efficacy
of monetary and fiscal policy actions by various
countries. The slowdown could be more protracted
in dire scenarios in which the duration of COVID-19
Source: Inflation Expectations Survey of Households, RBI.
extends longer. The Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) estimates
Looking ahead, three months and one year ahead
suggest that annual global gross domestic product
median inflation expectations of urban households
(GDP) growth could be lower by up to 2 percentage
softened by 10 bps and 20 bps, respectively, in the
points for each month in which strict containment
March 2020 round of the survey conducted by the RBI1.
measures continue. If the shutdown continues for
The proportion of respondents expecting the general
three months with no offsetting factors, annual GDP
price level to increase by more than the current rate
growth could be between 4-6 percentage points lower
also decreased for both three months and one year
than it otherwise might have been.
ahead horizons vis-à-vis the January 2020 round
I.1 The Outlook for Inflation (Chart I.2). Although largely adaptive, inflation
expectations of households and firms can shape
Headline consumer price index (CPI) inflation breached
future inflation through price and wage setting
the upper tolerance band of the target in December
behaviour. According to the Reserve Bank’s
2019 and peaked in January 2020, before ebbing prices
consumer confidence survey for March 2020,
of vegetables, fruits and petroleum products produced
inflation expectations moderated over the previous
a downward shift of 100 bps in February. The trajectory
round2.
of inflation in the near-term is likely to be conditioned
by the pace of reversal of the spike in vegetables prices, Manufacturing firms polled in the January-March 2020
the dispersion of inflationary pressures across other round of the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook survey
food prices, the incidence of one-off cost-push effects expected an increase in selling prices as well as in
on various elements of core inflation and especially, the cost of raw materials in Q1:2020-21; nonetheless,
the evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak. pricing power of firms is expected to remain weak
1 The Reserve Bank’s inflation expectations survey of households is conducted in 18 cities and the results of the March 2020 survey undertaken during
February 27– March 7, 2020 are based on responses from 5,912 households.
2 The Reserve Bank’s consumer confidence survey is conducted in 13 major cities and the results of the March 2020 round undertaken
during February 27-March 7, 2020 are based on responses from 5,365 respondents.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Chart I.3: Expectations about Cost of Raw Chart I.4: Inflation Expectations of
Materials and Selling Prices Professional Forecasters
Note: Net response is the difference between the respondents reporting Sources: Survey of Professional Forecasters, RBI and National Statistical Office.
optimism and those reporting pessimism. The range is -100 to 100. An
increase/decrease in net responses in respect of the selling price is optimistic/
pessimistic, while the increase/decrease in net response in respect of the cost of to retail prices. All these signals are, however, heavily
raw materials is pessimistic/optimistic from the view point of respondent firms.
Therefore, higher negative values for the cost of raw materials indicate higher conditioned by the depth, spread and duration of
input price pressures and vice versa.
Source: Industrial Outlook Survey, RBI. COVID-19 and shifts in any of these characteristics
of the pandemic can produce drastic changes in the
(Chart I.3)3. Purchasing managers’ surveys for outlook. In these conditions, forecasts are hazardous as
manufacturing and services reported moderation in they are subject to large revisions with every incoming
the rate of increase in input and output prices for data on the pandemic. The RBI Act, however, enjoins
March 2020. the Reserve Bank to publish and explain in the MPR,
inter alia, the forecasts of inflation for 6-18 months
Professional forecasters surveyed by the Reserve Bank
from the date of its publication. Therefore, taking
in March 2020 expected CPI inflation to ease from 6.6
into account initial conditions, signals from forward-
per cent in February 2020 to 5.3 per cent in Q1:2020-
looking surveys and estimates from time series and
21 and 3.2 per cent by Q4:2020-21 (Chart I.4) 4.
structural models, CPI inflation is tentatively projected
Thus, an array of forward-looking indicators is to ease from 4.8 per cent in Q1:2020-21 to 4.4 per cent
pointing to a much softer inflation trajectory. Looking in Q2, 2.7 per cent in Q3 and 2.4 per cent in Q4, with
ahead, the balance of inflation risks is slanted even the caveat that in the prevailing high uncertainty,
further to the downside. First, food prices may soften aggregate demand may weaken further than currently
under the beneficial effects of the record foodgrains anticipated and ease core inflation further, while
and horticulture production, at least till the onset supply bottlenecks could exacerbate pressures more
of the usual summer uptick. Second, the collapse in than expected. Per contra, a quick containment of
crude prices should work towards easing inflationary COVID-19 could lead to faster recovery and, therefore,
pressures, depending on the level of the pass-through firmer inflation pressures. Given the lockdown, the
3 The results of the January-March 2020 round of the industrial outlook survey (launched on January 30, 2020) are based on 860 responses received till
March 18, 2020.
4 25 panellists participated in the March 2020 round of the Reserve Bank’s survey of professional forecasters, conducted during March 6-19, 2020.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
compilation of the CPI for March and the following
Chart I.5: Consumer Confidence
few months by the National Statistical Office could
also become challenging. For 2021-22, assuming a
normal monsoon and no major exogenous or policy
shocks, structural model estimates indicate that
inflation could move in a range of 3.6-3.8 per cent.
I.2 The Outlook for Growth
Prior to the outbreak of COVID-19, the outlook for
growth for 2020-21 was looking up. First, the bumper
rabi harvest and higher food prices during 2019-20
provided conducive conditions for the strengthening
of rural demand. Second, the transmission of past
reductions in the policy rate to bank lending rates
has been improving, with favourable implications for
Source: Consumer Confidence Survey, RBI.
both consumption and investment demand. Third,
reductions in the goods and services tax (GST) rates,
of the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook survey,
corporate tax rate cuts in September 2019 and measures
reflecting expectations of higher production, order
to boost rural and infrastructure spending were
books, capacity utilisation, employment conditions,
directed at boosting domestic demand more generally.
exports and overall business situation (Chart I.6). In
The COVID-19 pandemic has drastically altered this
view of the intensification of COVID-19, a quick survey
outlook. The global economy is expected to slump
with select parameters was specially conducted during
into recession in 2020, as post-COVID projections
March 18-20 to capture business sentiments. From the
indicate. The sharp reduction in international crude
oil prices, if sustained, could improve the country’s
Chart I.6: Business Assessment and Expectations
terms of trade, but the gain from this channel is not
expected to offset the drag from the shutdown and
loss of external demand.
Turning to key messages from forward-looking surveys,
the March 2020 round of the Reserve Bank’s survey
showed that consumer confidence for the year ahead
was expected to remain around its level recorded in
the previous survey round in January 2020 (Chart I.5).
However, an important caveat to the forward-looking
surveys presented in this section is that they were
completed before the nation-wide lockdown effective
March 25.
Optimism in the manufacturing sector for the quarter
Source: Industrial Outlook Survey, RBI.
ahead had improved in the January-March 2020 round

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
limited responses received, a considerable worsening
Chart I.7: Professional Forecasters' Projection of
of the key demand indicators is seen in the outlook
Real GDP Growth
for Q1:2020-21.
Surveys by other agencies (conducted prior to the
intensification of COVID-19) indicated optimism on
future business expectations (Table I.3). According
to the purchasing managers’ surveys for March 2020,
one year ahead business expectations of firms in
manufacturing slumped to its weakest level, driven
by fears of prolonged disruption from COVID-19.
Business expectations of firms in the services sector
also fell.
Professional forecasters polled in the March 2020
round of the Reserve Bank’s survey (conducted during
Sources: Survey of Professional Forecasters, RBI and National Statistical Office.
March 6-19 before the announcement of the nation-
wide lockdown) expected real GDP growth to recover
Relatively modest upsides are expected to emanate
from 4.6 per cent in Q4:2019-20 to 6.1 per cent in
from monetary, fiscal and other policy measures and
Q4:2020-21 (Chart I.7 and Table I.4).
the early containment of COVID-19, if that occurs.
Overall, apart from the continuing resilience of Such uncertainties make the forecasting of inflation
agriculture and allied activities, other sectors of the and growth highly challenging (Box I.1).
economy will be adversely impacted by the pandemic,
depending upon its intensity, spread and duration. Table I.4: Projections - Professional Forecasters
(Per cent)
Median Projections of Professional Forecasters 2019-20 2020-21
Table I.3: Business Expectations Surveys
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 6.7 3.2
Item NCAER FICCI Dun and CII
Real GDP growth 5.0 5.5
Business Overall Bradstreet Business
Confidence Business Composite Confidence Gross domestic saving (per cent of GNDI) 29.4 29.5
Index Confidence Business Index
Gross capital formation (per cent of GDP) 30.0 30.0
(February Index Optimism (March
2020) (January Index 2020) Credit growth of scheduled commercial banks 7.2 9.3
2020) (March Combined gross fiscal deficit (per cent of GDP) 6.8 6.5
2020)
Central government gross fiscal deficit (per cent of GDP) 3.8 3.6
Current level of 111.2 59.0 63.0 53.4 Repo rate (end-period) 5.15 4.65
the index
Yield on 91-days treasury bills (end-period) 4.9 4.7
Index as per 103.1 55.0 56.4 49.4 Yield on 10-year central government securities
6.2 6.1
previous survey (end-period)
% change (q-o-q) 7.9 7.3 11.7 8.1 Overall balance of payments (US$ billion) 49.8 40.0
sequential Merchandise exports growth -2.9 -0.6
% change (y-o-y) -12.4 -2.2 -14.6 -18.1 Merchandise imports growth -7.2 -2.9
Current account balance (per cent of GDP) -1.0 -0.7
Notes:
1. NCAER: National Council of Applied Economic Research. Note: GNDI: Gross National Disposable Income.
2. FICCI: Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry. Source: Survey of Professional Forecasters (March 2020 round, conducted
3. CII: Confederation of Indian Industry. during March 6-19, 2020).

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Box I.1: Forecasting Under Uncertainty in a Cyclical Downturn
Monetary policy actions impact output and inflation challenging task, however, especially around the turning
with long and variable lags. Hence, timely and reliable points. In an analysis of inflation and GDP growth forecasts
forecasts of output and inflation are of critical importance. of 17 select central banks for 2018 and 2019, most of them,
Domestic and global shocks to key conditioning variables including the RBI, were initially optimistic about economic
such as global crude oil prices, global trade and growth, activity (i.e., negative forecast errors)5. The standardised
the exchange rate, the monsoon outturn and the forecast errors (i.e., errors divided by the actual growth
rising frequency of their visitations make forecasting a rate/inflation) were comparable (Chart I.1.1).
Chart I.1.1: Growth and Inflation Forecast Performance
a. Forecast Error - GDP Growth b. Forecast Error (Standardised) - GDP Growth
c. Forecast Error - Inflation d. Forecast Error (Standardised) - Inflation
Note: Forecast Error (Standardised) is forecast error as percentage of actual GDP growth/inflation of the country.
*: 15.4 percentage points in 2018 and (-) 4.9 percentage points in 2019; #: (-)1145 per cent in 2019.
Sources: Respective central banks’ websites; and RBI staff estimates.
(contd.)
5 Apart from the RBI, the analysis covers the central banks of Australia, Brazil, Canada, Czech Republic, Hungary, Iceland, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Romania, South Africa, Sweden, Turkey, UK, US and Euro area. For Romania and Turkey, the analysis is restricted to inflation forecasts in the absence
of information on GDP growth forecasts. The focus of the analysis is on one-year ahead forecast errors (actual outturn less the forecast); therefore, the
forecasts for the years 2018 and 2019 made in the last quarter of 2017 and 2018, respectively, are considered. For the RBI, the forecasts for the financial
years 2018-19 and 2019-20 available in the February 2018 and February 2019 policy statements, respectively, are taken.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Panel regression results indicate that global growth
Chart I.1.2: Inflation Forecast Errors and Share of Food
surprises have been an important factor underlying
domestic growth forecast errors; crude oil price surprises
have a negative impact, although not significant
(Equation 1). However, inflation forecast errors seem to
be more due to country-specific idiosyncratic factors -
domestic growth forecast errors as well as crude oil price
surprises are not statistically significant (Equation 2).
The constant term is statistically insignificant in both
the regressions, suggesting that the forecast errors were
unbiased, once the global growth and crude oil surprises
were controlled for.
y_fe = 0.18 + 1.04 yw_s - 0.006 doil ……….. (1)
it t it Note: Mean absolute error is average of absolute forecast errors for the years
(0.93) (4.91) (0.66) 2018 and 2019.
Sources: Websites of central banks/statistics offices and RBI staff estimates.
π_fe = -0.12 + 0.09 y_fe + 0.002 doil ……….. (2)
it it it In India, the forecasting challenges are even more acute,
(1.27) (1.13) (0.14)
given the high share (45.9 per cent) of the food basket in
Figures in parentheses are t-statistics; y_fe, π_fe, yw_s, the CPI (Combined) (Chart I.1.2) as well as large revisions
doil are growth forecast errors, inflation forecast errors, in past GDP growth rates. The Reserve Bank, like other
global growth surprise and change in crude oil prices in central banks, provides fan charts around the baseline
local currency terms, respectively6. projections to convey future uncertainty.
Against this backdrop and especially, the highly fluid on India’s growth and inflation can be assessed by
circumstances in which incoming data produce shifts using the Quarterly Projection Model (QPM)7 under
in the outlook for growth on a daily basis, forecasts alternative scenarios. Scenario 1 assumes global
for real GDP growth in India are not provided here, growth in 2020 to be 3 percentage points lower
awaiting a clear fix on the intensity, spread and than in 2019. Scenario 2 assumes that the outbreak
duration of COVID-19. To illustrate, in early March, is contained faster and the loss of global output
the OECD projected the decline in global growth for growth is only 1.5 percentage points relative to
2020 in the range of 0.5-1.5 percentage points. More 2019. Lower global output and demand can impact
recently, with COVID-19 having spread to more than the Indian economy through a variety of channels.
200 countries, the IMF’s latest assessment is that First, it can affect exports adversely, leading to lower
global growth during 2020 could be negative vis-à- domestic demand, growth and inflation. Second,
vis growth of 2.9 per cent in 2019 (which itself was international crude oil and other commodity prices
a decadal low). Thus, global growth could be lower have already softened sharply amidst high volatility
by three percentage points or more in 2020 relative and India, being a net importer, can benefit from
to 2019. The possible impact of the global slowdown the lower commodity prices. Finally, heightened
6 Global growth surprise is captured by actual global growth less the forecast made in the preceding year’s October edition of the IMF’s World Economic
Outlook. Crude oil price surprise is measured as the percentage change in its local-currency price during the year from its level in the last quarter of the
preceding year.
7 The QPM is a semi-structural, forward-looking, open economy, calibrated, gap model in the New Keynesian tradition and provides an internally
consistent analysis of various feedback mechanisms.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart I.8: COVID-19 Outbreak: Impact of Global Slowdown on India’s Growth and Inflation
a. GDP Growth (y-o-y) b. Inflation (y-o-y)
Source: RBI staff estimates.
global financial market volatility can feed into inflation by around 20 bps and GDP growth by around
domestic financial markets and impact both growth 15 bps vis-à-vis the baseline.
and inflation. The QPM captures all these channels.
(ii) International Crude Oil Prices
The model’s simulations suggest that, on account of
Global crude oil prices have declined sharply from
global factors, domestic growth could be lower, at
its peak, by 180 bps in Scenario 1 and by 80 bps in their October 2019 levels mainly due to weakening of
Scenario 2. Inflation could be lower by 40-100 bps at global demand following the outbreak of COVID-19,
its peak under the two scenarios (Chart I.8). and Saudi Arabia’s decision to cut prices. However, the
short and medium-term outlook of oil remains highly
I.3 Balance of Risks
uncertain. A V-shaped global recovery due to an early
The COVID-19 pandemic poses upside and downside
containment of the COVID-19 or renewed geopolitical
risks to the baseline assumptions and outlook.
tensions or an agreement on production cuts could
(i) Exchange Rate lead to a sharp reversal in international crude oil
prices. Should the Indian basket of crude oil prices
The exchange rate of the Indian rupee vis-à-vis the US
increase by 10 per cent above the baseline assumption,
dollar has moved in both directions in recent months.
inflation could be higher by 20 bps and growth could
Renewed bouts of global financial market volatility
be weaker by around 15 bps. If COVID-19 were to
caused by the uncertainty of macroeconomic impact
persist longer, global economic activity and demand
of the COVID-19, as in February-March 2020, could
exert pressure on the Indian rupee. Should the INR for crude oil could fall further in an environment of
depreciate by 5 per cent from the baseline, inflation sustained oversupply due to Saudi Arabia’s decision to
could edge up by around 20 bps while GDP growth enhance production. Should the Indian basket crude
could be higher by around 15 bps through increased price fall by 10 per cent vis-à-vis the baseline, inflation
net exports. In contrast, should COVID-19 normalise could ease by up to 20 bps and growth higher by up to
quickly, strong capital flows could revive. An 15 bps, depending upon the extent of pass-through to
appreciation of the INR by 5 per cent could moderate domestic product prices.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
(iii) Food Prices headline inflation above the baseline by around 50
bps in 2020-21.
After remaining subdued for a considerable period,
food inflation in India increased sharply during I.4 Conclusion
October 2019-January 2020, driven by a spike
COVID-19, the accompanying lockdowns and the
in vegetable prices. The baseline path assumes
expected contraction in global output in 2020 weigh
vegetable prices to fall rapidly in response to arrivals
heavily on the growth outlook. The actual outturn
of rabi harvests and a normal south-west monsoon
would depend upon the speed with which the
during 2020, which is supported by early signals of
outbreak is contained and economic activity returns to
likely ENSO (El Nino – Southern Oscillation) neutral normalcy. Significant monetary and liquidity measures
conditions. Adequate buffer stocks in cereals and a taken by the Reserve Bank and fiscal measures by the
good rabi harvest (2019 season) could soften food government would mitigate the adverse impact on
inflation more than anticipated and pull down domestic demand and help spur economic activity
headline inflation by 50 bps below the baseline. once normalcy is restored. Risks around the inflation
On the other hand, a deficient or spatially skewed projections appear balanced at this juncture and the
south-west monsoon, and an unexpected hardening tentative outlook is benign relative to recent history.
of prices of non-vegetable food items could push But COVID-19 hangs over the future, like a spectre.

II. Prices and Costs
Consumer price inflation surged between October 2019 and January 2020 propelled by a vegetable price spike,
particularly of onions and breached the upper tolerance threshold in December before moderating in February. Fuel
prices emerged out of deflation in December. After touching a historic low in October, inflation in CPI excluding
food and fuel edged up due to idiosyncratic cost-push factors. Costs of farm inputs, industrial raw materials,
agricultural and non-agricultural labourers’ nominal wages and organised sector staff costs remained muted.
Headline inflation, measured by the consumer have been 4.5 per cent in Q3 and 5.9 per cent in Q4
price index (CPI),1 had been trailing below target for (till February), underscoring the severity of the onion
thirteen consecutive months till Q2:2019-20 when a price shock. Fuel prices too moved out of five months
ratcheting up of vegetables prices – mainly those of of deflation into positive territory in December 2019
onions – dispelled this environment of price stability. and increased sharply thereafter. Inflation excluding
In the event, headline inflation breached the upper food and fuel – or core inflation – hardened in
tolerance ceiling of 6 per cent by December 2019 a sustained manner from a historic low of 3.4 per
cent in October 2019 to 4.3 per cent in January 2020,
and peaked at 7.6 per cent in January 2020 before
propelled by a series of cost pushes before registering
moderating to 6.6 per cent in February. An unusually
some moderation in February (Chart II.1).
prolonged south-west monsoon and unseasonal
rains ravaged the later part of the kharif harvest and The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act, 1934 (amended
produced an unprecedented rise in prices of onions. in 2016) enjoins the RBI to set out deviations of actual
In fact, excluding onions, headline inflation would inflation outcomes from projections, if any, and
Chart II.1: CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
Sources: National Statistical Office (NSO); and RBI staff estimates.
1 Headline inflation is measured by year-on-year changes in all India CPI Combined (Rural and Urban).

Chapter II Prices and Costs
food and fuel inflation also turned out to be a source
Chart II.2: CPI Inflation (y-o-y):
of projection errors in Q4 due to a series of cost-push
Projection versus Actual
shocks – higher mobile phone tariffs; higher motor-
vehicles prices due to the ongoing switchover to
BS-VI2 compliant vehicles, higher gold prices
reflecting international price movements; and higher
services prices for sweepers, laundry, beauticians,
bus fares – reflecting, inter alia, the spill over from
higher food and fuel prices. In Q4:2019-20 (January-
February), crude oil prices (Indian basket) softened
from around US$ 63 per barrel at the time of the
October MPR to US$ 55 per barrel by February, which
helped temper these cost-push upsides.
II.1 Consumer Prices
*: Projections for entire Q4:2019-20 vis-a-vis actual average inflation during
Jan.- Feb. 2020.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates. A decomposition of year-on-year (y-o-y) inflation
suggests that a sharp increase in price momentum
explain the underlying reasons thereof. The Monetary
as well as unfavourable base effects were at work
Policy Report (MPR) of October 2019 had projected
in H2:2019-203. As against the normal seasonal
CPI inflation to remain range-bound in H2: 2019-20,
decline in food prices during Q3, the measured food
at 3.5 per cent in Q3:2019-20 and at 3.7 per cent for
price momentum in Q3 was positive registering
Q4:2019-20. Actual inflation outcomes have overshot
the highest increase during any third quarter in
projections by a considerable margin – 2.3 percentage
the history of the index. As a result, food inflation
points in Q3 and 3.4 percentage points in Q4
surged to double digits by the end of Q3. Adverse
(Chart II.2).
base effects also pushed up fuel inflation. In January,
As stated earlier, the unanticipated and unparalleled
food prices started to decline, but the persisting
spike in onion prices was the major source of
firmness in the momentum of core inflation pushed
deviation of headline inflation from projections.
headline inflation to a peak in January. In February,
Unseasonal rains also delayed the seasonal winter
headline inflation moderated coming from a sharp
moderation in prices of other vegetables, particularly
decline in food prices and waning of core inflation
those of potatoes. In addition, a larger than
momentum (Chart II.3).
anticipated pick-up in cereals and milk prices due
to kharif crop damage coming from the unseasonal The distribution of inflation across CPI groups in
rains, lower wheat imports and higher minimum 2019-20 has diverged considerably from the recent
support prices for wheat in the case of the former historical experience. Median inflation rate turned
and an escalation in input costs in the case of the out to be lower compared with the last three-year
latter aggravated inflation pressures. CPI excluding average. However, 2019-20 exhibited high positive
2 BS VI or Bharat Stage VI denotes the new emission standard that needs to be complied by all light and heavy vehicles, two and three wheeled vehicles
manufactured on or after April 1, 2020.
3 A change in CPI year-on-year (y-o-y) inflation between any two months is the difference between the current month-on-month (m-o-m) change in the
price index (momentum) and the m-o-m change in the price index 12 months earlier (base effect). For more details see Box I.1 of the MPR, September 2014.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart II.3: CPI Inflation – Momentum and Base Effects
a: CPI Headline b: CPI Food and Beverages
c: CPI Fuel and Light d: CPI excluding Food and Fuel
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
skew – as food sub-groups like vegetables exhibited
Chart II.4: Average CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
very high inflation rates – compared to a negative (Kernel Density Estimates)
skew for the historical average. As a result, the
mean inflation rate for 2019-20 turned out to be
considerably higher than the average of last 3
years (Chart II.4). Even as select food items swayed
overall inflation rates in Q3:2019-20, a pick-up in
the diffusion indices4 of price changes in CPI items,
on a seasonally adjusted basis, also point to a broad-
basing of price increases in the CPI basket – across
goods and services – during this period. In Q4 so far,
while almost all services have continued to register
price increases, incidence of price increases in goods
has seen some compression, largely on account of
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
food items (Chart II.5).
4 The CPI diffusion index, a measure of dispersion of price changes, categorises items in the CPI basket according to whether their prices have risen,
remained stagnant or fallen over the previous month. A reading above 50 for the diffusion index signals a broad expansion or generalisation of price
increases and a reading below 50 signals a broad-based price decline.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
pulses, sugar and petroleum products. Durable goods
Chart II.5: Diffusion Indices: CPI
contribution to headline inflation, which remained
(M-o-m Seasonally Adjusted)
largely steady during September-December – on
an average at 36 bps – picked up to around 40 bps
in January-February due to a rise in gold prices.
Imported goods7 contributed negatively to overall
inflation during September-November 2019, but
their contribution turned positive during December
2019-February 2020 – on an average contributing
around 60 bps to headline inflation, after a surge in
energy and precious metals prices (Chart II.6c). The
contribution of services to overall inflation remained
sticky at around one percentage point as the sharp
increase in mobile telecom charges during December
2019-January 2020 more than offset the moderation
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates. in inflation in house rentals, hospital services and
tuition fees (Chart II.6b).
II.2 Drivers of Inflation
CPI Food Group
A historical decomposition of inflation outcomes
Food and beverages (weight: 45.9 per cent in CPI)
in H2:2019-20 reveals how adverse supply shocks
weighed heavily on changes in the overall CPI inflation
overwhelmed the disinflationary impact of subdued
during April 2019-February 2020, with the cumulative
domestic demand, both urban and rural (Chart II.6a).5
peak food price build-up in December turning out to
Perishable goods (non-durable goods with a 7-day
be at a historical high (Chart II.7a & II.7b).
recall6) – food items such as vegetables, milk and
meat products – were the key drivers, contributing As a result, food inflation, which had ranged between
1.3 percentage points to overall inflation in Q2, 3.7 0.7 per cent and 4.7 per cent during March-September
percentage points in Q3 and 4.0 percentage points 2019, accelerated thereafter to peak at 12.2 per cent
in Q4 so far (Chart II.6b). The contribution of less in December (Chart II.8a). Most of this upsurge was
perishable goods (non-durable goods with a 30-day propelled by a vegetables price spike as a consequence
recall) also picked up from Q3:2019-20 due to cereals, of unseasonal rains; however, broad-basing of price
5 Historical decompositions are used to estimate the contribution of each shock to the movements in inflation over the sample period, based on a vector
auto regression (VAR) with the following variables (represented as the vector Y) – the annual growth rate in crude oil prices; inflation; the output gap; the
t
annual growth rate in rural wages and the policy repo rate. The VAR can be written in reduced form as: Y =c + A Y + e; where e represents a vector of
t t-1 t t
shocks [oil price shock; supply shock (inflation shock); output gap shock; wage shock; and policy shock]. Using Wold decomposition, Y can be represented
t
as a function of its deterministic trend and sum of all the shocks e. This formulation facilitates decomposition of the deviation of inflation from its
t
deterministic trend into the sum of contributions from various shocks.
6 The CPI weighting diagrams use the modified mixed reference period (MMRP) data based on the 2011-12 Consumer Expenditure Survey conducted by
the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO). Under MMRP, data on expenditure incurred are collected for frequently purchased items – for edible oil, eggs,
fish, meat, vegetables, fruits, spices, beverages, processed foods, pan, tobacco and intoxicants, during the last seven days; for clothing, bedding, footwear,
education, medical (institutional), durable goods, during the last 365 days; and for all other food, fuel and light, miscellaneous goods and services including
non-institutional medical services, rents and taxes, during the last 30 days.
7 India’s imports are dominated by crude petroleum & petroleum products (around 25.0 per cent of the total imports. The other major components of
imports are electronic goods (11.0 per cent), gold and silver (8.0 per cent), chemical and chemical products (6.0 per cent), metal and metal products (6.0
per cent), pears and precious stones (6.0 per cent) and vegetables oils (2.0 per cent). Also, the domestic prices of items such as raw cotton move in tandem
with international cotton prices.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart II.6: Drivers of CPI Inflation
a: Decomposition of CPI Inflation*
* Deviation from deterministic trend.
Note: Estimated using a Vector Auto Regression with oil prices in INR, CPI inflation, output gap, rural wages and policy rate using the quarterly data from quarter Q1:2002-03 to
Q4:2019-20.
b: Contribution of Goods and Services c: Contribution of Imported Inflation
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
pressures across the food category was observed in spices, eggs, cereals and milk (Chart II.8b). Food
H2:2019-20 encompassing pulses, meat and fish, inflation moderated sequentially in January and
Chart II.7: CPI Food Price Build-up
a: CPI Food: Cumulative Momentum b: Financial Year Price Build-up (February over March)
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI- Food and beverages.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.8: CPI Food Inflation and Price Build-up
a: CPI Food Inflation (y-o-y) - Contributions b: Cumulative CPI Food Price Build-up - Contributions
*: Includes milk and products, meat & fish and egg.
#: Includes prepared meals, snacks, sweets etc. and non-alcoholic beverages.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI-Food and beverages.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
February 2020, with the delayed seasonal easing in peaked at 60.5 per cent in December 2019, reflecting
vegetables prices. the impact of crop losses and supply disruptions due to
excessive and unseasonal rains (Chart II.9a). With the
Price increases in respect of cereals (weight of 9.7
arrival of the late kharif harvest, a delayed seasonal
per cent in the CPI and 21.1 per cent in the food and
easing in vegetables prices started in January 2020.
beverages group) were sharper in H2: 2019-20. Wheat
The year 2019-20 will likely be unique in vegetable
prices were driven up by higher procurement at
price pressures, as the severe supply shock completely
upwardly revised minimum support prices (MSPs) and
overshadowed the seasonal pattern of usual winter
significantly lower imports [(-)39 per cent lower during
easing in prices of vegetables, particularly onions,
April 2019-January 2020]. Non-public distribution
system (PDS) rice prices emerged out of 11 months tomatoes and potatoes which brings relief from the
of deflation in October 2019 and gained momentum price build-up during the preceding months of the
thereafter in the wake of damage to kharif crops due year (Chart II.9b).
to unseasonal rain in October and early November
In India, a societal intolerance to inflation in double
2019. They started to moderate from February 2020
digits stands out starkly including in political
due to large carry forward stocks, better rabi harvest
discourse. This is best exemplified in social responses
prospects and lower exports.
to inflation in onion prices. In 2019-20, onion prices
Inflation in prices of vegetables (weight of 6.0 per cent surged from September 2019, with inflation in this
in the CPI and 13.2 per cent in the food and beverages category spiking to 327 per cent in December 2019
group) rose to double digits from September 2019 and and contributing a staggering 4.7 percentage points to

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart II.9: CPI Vegetables and CPI Food Price Momentum
a: Drivers of Vegetable Inflation (y-o-y) b: CPI-Food and Beverages: Cumulative Momentum
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI-Vegetables. Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in overall CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
food inflation and 2.1 percentage points to headline positive during April 2019-January 2020, firmed up
inflation. This unpleasant inflation surprise exposed by crop loss and supply disruptions from excess/
the time lags and lack of adequate band-width of unseasonal rains during October-November 2019 in
supply-side measures such as imposing minimum Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, which was
export price (MEP) of US$ 850 per tonnes, banning reflected in lower mandi arrivals. Anecdotal evidence
export of onions, and imposing stock holding limits also suggests that cyclone bulbul resulted in delayed
on wholesale traders and retailers in September 2019, sowing in West Bengal by around 20 days. As a result,
as well as announcing import of 1.2 lakh tonnes of potato price inflation rose to 62.9 per cent in January
onions from Turkey, Afghanistan and Egypt during 2020, before moderating to 47.0 per cent in February
November-December 2019. It was only with the arrival 2020 due to fresh arrivals on the back of production
of late kharif crop from January 2020 that onion prices
turning out to be higher by 3.5 per cent in 2019-20. On
began moderating. The ferocious pace of onion price
the other hand, inflation in tomato prices moderated
escalation and the extent of spillovers highlight the
from its peak of 70 per cent in May 2019 and remained
urgent need for supply side reforms (Box II.1).
in high double digits during October-December 2019,
As regards other inflation-sensitive vegetables, reflecting untimely rains and associated supply
potato prices remained in deflation from April 2019 disruptions. Beginning January 2020, tomato price
to October 2019, despite a pick-up in prices during inflation started moderating in the usual seasonal
this period, largely due to favourable base effects. downturn and turned into deflation in February 2020
The momentum of potato prices remained broadly at (-)4.3 per cent.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Box II.1: Onion Price Shock – Issues in Supply Management
The onion price shock of 2019 is the largest in recent where Y represents the vector of daily prices of onion
t
times in terms of magnitude and duration (Chart II.1.1). in the key wholesale markets, viz. Jodhpur, Kurnool,
Nashik, Pune and Others (average of other markets), and
In order to understand this, in many ways, unprecedented
the average all-India retail prices; e represents the vector
experience, the dynamics of the transmission of onion t
of supply and demand shocks – shocks corresponding
price shocks from various wholesale markets to all
to wholesale market prices represent the supply shocks
India average retail prices are evaluated with a vector
and the shock corresponding to average retail market
autoregressive (VAR) model using daily data on price
price represents the demand shock. The estimates are
of onions from wholesale and retail markets with the
based on daily wholesale and retail price data provided by
following specification:
Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA), Government of
Y = c + A Y + e …………………..(1) India from August 5, 2019 to February 28, 2020.
t t-1 t
Chart II.1.1: Mandi Price of Onions
Source: Agmarknet.
The historical decomposition of average retail prices getting transmitted to all-India retail prices, exacerbated
points to onion price shocks from the wholesale markets by widening of price margins between wholesale and
of Maharashtra in early-October and thereafter spreading retail markets. By end-January, the onion price shocks
to Karnataka by early-November and almost immediately completely reversed (Chart II.1.2).
Chart II.1.2: Decomposition of Average Retail Price of Onion (`/Kg)*
* Deviation from the deterministic trend.
Sources: RBI staff estimates based on data from DCA, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution.
(contd.)

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Given that onion production in India in any given year consumers; (3) strengthening initiatives like e-NAM for
comfortably meets demand with additional produce better price discovery; (4) improving storage facilities
available for exports, this analysis underscores the for farmers so as to avoid distress sales; (5) creating an
need for refining the supply management policies in adequate buffer stock of rabi produce to help manage
managing the volatility in onion prices. The contours supply disruptions during leaner kharif and late-kharif
of more effective supply management for onions need seasons; and (6); encouraging food processing initiatives
to centre around the following: (1) making available – dehydrating onions to convert into powder and paste
better information systems to farmers on weather and forms that can be made available at a reasonable price.
the production outlook so as to enable them better In fact, most of the onion price spikes in the past have
plan onion production for the year ahead; (2) initiating occurred in kharif and late-kharif seasons, pointing
reforms in the agricultural marketing systems to to the key role of supply-side management policies in
encourage direct sale of farm produce by farmers to mitigating onion price spikes.
Prices of fruits (weight of 2.9 per cent in the CPI and Prices of pulses (weight of 2.4 per cent in the CPI and
6.3 per cent within the food and beverages group) 5.2 per cent in the food and beverages group) were
emerged out of 9 months of deflation in September another source of inflation pressures with inflation
2019 to reach a level of 5.8 per cent in January in this category picking up considerably to reach 16.6
2020, primarily due to unfavourable base effects. By per cent in February 2020 from (-) 0.8 per cent in
February 2020, fruit price inflation eased to 4.0 per April 2019. This reflected a decline in kharif pulses
cent. Banana prices have seen a sustained decline production – by 2.1 per cent as per second advance
since November 2019. On the other hand, apple prices estimates (AE) for 2019-20 over final estimates for
started a decline from August 2019 itself on the back 2018-19 – and especially urad production (by 27.1
of higher market arrivals consequent on production per cent) on account of lower kharif sowing and
being higher by 18.0 per cent during 2019-20, although unseasonal rains-led crop damages (Chart II.10). Even
prices recovered somewhat since January 2020. though imports were higher by 25 per cent during
Chart II.10: Drivers of CPI-Pulses and Products (m-o-m)
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI-Pulses and products.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
April 2019-January 2020 y-o-y, they failed to mitigate shortfalls, higher than expected domestic availability
the rising price pressures in pulses. due to last year’s carry forward stock has helped keep
domestic price pressures under check.
Besides vegetables and pulses, prices of animal-based
protein-rich items were another pressure point, Inflation in prices of edible oils and fats also edged up
contributing 20.4 per cent to overall food inflation during the year from 0.7 per cent in April 2019 to 7.6
in 2019-20. Inflation in the case of meat and fish per cent in February 2020. Higher edible oils inflation
remained elevated during April 2019-January 2020 emerged from a combination of rising international
and reached 10.6 per cent in January 2020 (highest in prices, lower domestic production of rabi oilseeds and
last 72 months). The prices of meat and fish increased adverse base effects. Higher milk prices also impacted
significantly during the year (except during the lean the prices of ghee and butter.
season of August-October 2019) reflecting higher feed
Price pressures picked up considerably in spices
prices (especially, maize and soybean) on account of
leading to a gradual hardening of inflation in this
unseasonal rains, which accentuated seasonal price
group to 8.8 per cent in February 2020 from 0.8 per
pressures. Concomitantly, egg price inflation also
cent in April 2019 due to overall lower production.
inched up to 10.5 per cent in January 2020 from 1.9
CPI Fuel Group
per cent in April 2019, but softened to 7.3 per cent
in February 2020. Prices of both chicken and egg Prices of the CPI fuel group, which sank into deflation
contracted sharply in February 2020 on account of a in July at (-)0.3 per cent, continued in negative
fall in consumption due to COVID-19 scare. territory till November 2019 as prices of key fuel
items such as liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), firewood
Prices of milk and milk products (weight of 6.6 per cent
and chips and dung cake moved into deep deflation.
in the CPI and 14.4 per cent in the food and beverages
The fuel group moved out of deflation in December
group) also contributed to higher food inflation. Co-
registering a sharp rise thereafter, taking inflation in
operatives like Amul and Mother Dairy raised retail
this category to 6.4 per cent by February. A pick-up in
milk prices for the second time (first round in May
prices of electricity, LPG and firewood and chips and
2019) in December 2019 in the range of ` 2-3 per litre
strong adverse base effects contributed to this upsurge
due to increased procurement prices. Many state milk
(Chart II.11a). International propane and butane
co-operatives also announced increases in prices,
prices, which were declining through H1:2019-20,
which kept the momentum of milk and its products
registered sustained price increases during October
at an elevated level during the year. Procurement
2019-January 2020, accentuated by supply disruptions
prices were raised in response to the increase in the
due to geopolitical tensions. These pressures were
cost of production. Additionally, higher global prices
also transmitted to domestic LPG prices with a lag in
for skimmed milk products also impacted domestic
February 2020 (Chart II.11b). Administered kerosene
milk prices positively. Milk inflation hardened to a
price inflation remained sticky and elevated reflecting
56-month high of 6.0 per cent in February 2020.
calibrated price increases by oil marketing companies
Sugar and confectionery prices (weight of 1.4 per cent (OMCs) to phase out the fuel subsidy. By early
in the CPI and 3.0 per cent in the food and beverages February, however, administered prices were above
group) emerged out of four months of continuous market rates, particularly due to the sudden plunge in
deflation in October 2019, partly due to adverse international prices. This led to a reduction in kerosene
base effects. Despite domestic and global production prices in the PDS during March-April (Chart II.11c).

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart II.11: CPI Fuel Group Inflation
a: Drivers (y-o-y)
*: Includes diesel [excl. conveyance], coke, coal, charcoal and other fuels.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI-Fuel and light.
b: LPG Price Movements c: Kerosene Price Movements
Notes: (1) The international price for LPG is based on spot prices for Saudi Butane and Propane, combined in the ratio of 60:40 respectively. These international product
prices are indicative import prices. Further details are available at www.ppac.org.in.
(2) The indicative international price for Kerosene is the Singapore Jet Kero spot price.
(3) The domestic prices of LPG and Kerosene represent the average prices at four metros from Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL).
Sources: (i) For Chart II.11a, NSO and RBI staff estimates.
(ii) For Chart II.11b & II.11c, Bloomberg; Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL); and NSO.
CPI excluding Food and Fuel
in October 2019 to 4.3 per cent in January 2020,
CPI inflation excluding food and fuel or core before registering some moderation in February 2020
inflation picked up sequentially from 3.4 per cent (Chart II.12). In terms of components, the price
Chart II.12: Exclusion-based CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
Notes: (1) Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI. (2) Dervided as residual from headline CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
diesel, which was in deflation for 11 months till
Chart II.13: CPI excluding Food and Fuel –
November 2019, saw a sharp uptick in inflation during
Financial Year Price Buildup
(February over March) December 2019-January 2020 before moderating in
February. Volatility in crude oil prices in H2:2019-
20 emanated from a series of events starting with
rising geo-political tensions in early September,
followed by production cuts by the Organization of
the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)-plus in
early December and renewed geo-political tensions
in early January. Crude oil prices moderated sharply
from mid-January on easing of geo-political tensions,
price war between OPEC and Russia, and fears of a
global recession due to COVID-19. While the pass-
through of collapse in international crude oil prices
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI excluding food and fuel. to domestic pump prices is still unfolding, its extent
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
has been tempered by increases in taxes on petrol
build-up during 2019-20 was much lower than and diesel (Chart II.14a). Excise duties for petrol and
historical averages, barring for the transport and diesel were increased by ` 3 per litre each on March
communication, and personal care and effects sub- 14, 2020 as international crude oil prices tumbled
groups (Chart II.13). below US$ 40 per barrel. With this increase, the
total excise duty on petrol and diesel works out to
Volatile movements in international crude oil prices
and the consequent increase in domestic pump prices ` 22.98 per litre and ` 18.83 per litre, respectively.
mainly contributed to the upturn in CPI excluding The divergence between international and domestic
food and fuel inflation till January 2020 and the pump prices has now widened to highest levels seen
subsequent moderation in February. CPI petrol and in the recent period (Chart II.14b).
Chart II.14: Movements in International and Domestic Petroleum Product Prices
a: Petrol b: Cumulative Change in International and Domestic
Petrol Prices over September 2013
Note: International petrol prices denote the spot price of Singapore gasoline.
Domestic prices represent the average pump prices at four metros from Indian
Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL). Note: September 2013 represents the peak level for petrol prices in India.
Sources: Bloomberg; IOCL; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
CPI inflation excluding food, fuel, petrol and diesel Core services inflation moderated sharply during
troughed in December, before registering a sharp October-November 2019 due to a fall in inflation in
increase in Q4 so far (January-February). CPI inflation domestic maid/cook and other household services;
excluding food, fuel, petrol, diesel, gold, silver – which tuition fees in education services; house rentals;
further excludes the volatile gold and silver price transport fares and mobile telephone charges under
effects – also saw similar movements (Chart II.12). transportation and communication services. Mobile
telephone charges have, however, increased (by close
A break-up of CPI excluding food, fuel, petrol and
to 12 per cent between November 2019 and February
diesel into its good and services components, shows
2020), following the increase in tariffs by major
the impact of cost-push factors which reversed a sharp
private mobile operators in early December. Bus fares
moderation in inflation in this category and hardened
and administered railway fares also increased during
it during December 2019- January 2020 (Chart II.15).
this period. As a result, transport and communication
Core goods prices inflation moderated sequentially
services inflation registered significant increases,
till December 2019, caused by a broad-based fall
pushing up overall services inflation. Reflecting
in inflation across goods items, particularly health
subdued demand conditions, housing inflation
inflation due to large and favourable base effects.
softened throughout H2:2019-20. Education services
Goods inflation has been ticking up since January
inflation also remained soft during December
due to firming up of prices of clothing, pan, tobacco,
2019-February 2020 (Chart II.15b).
medicines in the health sub-group following an
Other Measures of Inflation
increase in administered prices of essential medicines
and automobiles in the transport and communication Inflation in sectoral CPIs, i.e., for industrial workers
sub-group due to a rise in input costs and a switch- (CPI-IW), agricultural labourers (CPI-AL) and rural
over in emission norms to BS-VI (Chart II.15a). labourers (CPI-RL), increased sharply during
Chart II.15: Contribution to CPI Inflation excluding Food, Fuel, Petrol and Diesel
a: Goods (y-o-y) b: Services (y-o-y)
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.16: Alternative Inflation Measures (y-o-y)
a: Various Measures of Inflation (y-o-y) b: Trimmed Means of CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
Sources: NSO; Labour Bureau; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.
August-December 2019, driven up primarily by the global commodity prices. Subsequently, WPI inflation
unseasonal rise in food prices. The pace of increase, edged up in line with sectoral CPIs as wholesale food
however, softened in January-February 2020, on the prices rose in December 2019-January 2020 before
back of cooling of prices in the food group. Inflation in moderating again in February with easing of food
food and fuel components of CPI-AL and CPI-RL was prices. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and Gross Value
higher than that in headline CPI. A larger share of food Added (GVA) deflators picked up in Q3:2019-20 after
nudged overall inflation measured by these indices to reaching a record low in Q2:2019-20, indicating a clear
double digit levels during December 2019-February divergence with CPI and a broad alignment with WPI
2020. (Chart II.16a).
In the case of CPI-IW, with the complete waning of the Trimmed mean measures of inflation, obtained
house rent allowance impact of the seventh central by statistically removing outliers and eliminating
pay commission (CPC) after December 2019, inflation positive and negative skew, provide a measure of
registered a sharp fall, closing the gap with headline underlying inflation movements. Exclusion based
measures of CPI also capture persistent trends in
CPI. Notwithstanding this ebbing, the latest increase
inflation by removing components that are considered
in momentum in housing index in CPI-IW – which
idiosyncratic. Over the last six months, both trimmed
is revised once in six months, in January and July
means and exclusion-based measures, have firmed up
every year – contributed the largest upward push to
(Charts II.12 and II.16b).
CPI-IW in January 2020 (with a m-o-m increase of 3.7
percentage points). CPI-IW inflation decreased further II.3 Costs
in February 2020 due to sharp correction in food prices
Underlying cost conditions have largely been in
by 1.7 percentage points.
sync with inflation in terms of the WPI (Chart II.17).
Inflation in terms of the wholesale price index (WPI) Inflation in terms of farm inputs and industrial raw
fell during August-October 2019 in sharp contrast to material prices (extracted from WPI) moderated
the sectoral CPIs, due to a decline in prices of non-food significantly after April 2019 and remained in negative
manufactured products on account of the softening of territory during September-November 2019, before

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart II.17: Farm and Non-farm Input Cost Inflation (y-o-y)
*: Comprising primary non-food articles, minerals, coal, aviation turbine fuel, high speed diesel, naphtha, bitumen, furnace oil, lube oil, petroleum coke, electricity,
cotton yarn and paper & pulp from WPI.
$: Comprising high speed diesel, fodder, electricity, fertilisers, pesticides and agricultural & forestry machinery from WPI.
Sources: Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.
registering a pick up during December 2019-February which carry a high weight in both industrial and farm
2020. The pick-up during December 2019-January inputs, recorded a modest increase during the year,
2020 partly reflected recovery in prices of global crude reflecting weak demand conditions. Inflation in terms
oil and petrochemicals as well as adverse base effects. of agricultural machinery and implements costs has
In addition, cost of minerals and non-food articles also softened gradually during the current financial
also influenced the recent price dynamics of non-farm year.
input costs.
Growth in nominal rural wages, both for agricultural
Among other industrial raw materials, domestic coal and non-agricultural labourers, remained subdued
inflation picked up to 2.4 per cent during October averaging around 3.4 per cent and 3.3 per cent,
2019-February 2020 from 0.4 per cent in April 2019 respectively, during 2019-20 so far (up to January
in line with the increase in international coal prices. 2020) mainly reflecting continued slowdown in the
Prices of paper and paper products remained in construction sector (Chart II.18). With a sharp rise in
deflation during July 2019-February 2020 due to lower rural retail inflation, however, real rural wage growth
raw material cost, including that of pulp. In the case of has been negative as derived from CPI-AL and CPI-RL
fibres, deflation persisted during August 2019-February measures since March 2019 and CPI-rural inflation
2020, following easing in prices of raw cotton and coir since September 2019.
fibre, which also reflected in the contraction in cotton
Growth in organised sector staff costs showed divergent
yarn prices during the same period.
movements for services and manufacturing firms.
As regards farm sector inputs, inflation hardened While staff cost growth of services firms increased
in the case of fodder due to unseasonal rains, while in Q3:2019-20 over the previous quarter, it declined
some easing was observed in the case of fertilisers and for manufacturing firms. Unit labour costs (ratio of
pesticides reflecting generally subdued momentum staff cost to value of production in percentage terms)
in international fertiliser prices. Prices of electricity, for companies in the manufacturing sector increased

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.18: Wage Growth and Inflation in Rural Areas (y-o-y)
Sources: NSO; Labour Bureau; and RBI staff estimates.
sequentially from 5.9 per cent in Q4:2018-19 to 6.3 per per cent in Q2:2019-20 to 27.9 per cent in Q3 even as
cent in Q1:2019-20 and further to 6.8 per cent in Q2 staff cost increased somewhat (Chart II.19).
due to sequential decline in the value of production,
Manufacturing firms participating in the Reserve
alongside an increase in staff cost. In Q3:2019-20, unit
Bank’s industrial outlook survey reported muted
labour cost for manufacturing moderated marginally. cost pressures in Q3:2019-20 and Q4. This reflected
On the other hand, higher quarterly growth in value softening of inflation in farm and industrial raw
of production for firms in the services sector led to a materials in Q3 and weak metal and other commodity
fall of 220 basis points in unit labour cost from 30.1 price pressures in Q4. A decline in cost of finance
Chart II.19: Labour Cost in Manufacturing and Services (Staff Cost Per Unit Value of Production)
*: Listed companies with net worth more than `5 billion were required to adopt the new accounting standards, 'Ind-AS', by Q1:2016-17 and rest of the listed companies
by Q1:2017-18, as mandated by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. The impact of the transition appears muted at the aggregate level in terms of growth rates, although the
same may not hold for the ratios. The data may be accordingly read with appropriate caveats.
Sources: Capitaline database; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
was also reported by the companies polled in Q3 II.4 Conclusion
and Q4. Cost pressures on account of salary outgoes
The inflation landscape changed dramatically
also fell in Q3 and are expected to have remained
during H2:2019-20 primarily on account of wide
weak in Q4. Weak demand conditions and muted
input price pressures kept selling prices soft, with swings in onion prices. In Q4:2019-20, before
expectations showing only a muted uptick in Q4. the intensification of COVID-19, forward looking
While producers’ price expectations were subdued, surveys were already indicating weak consumer
inflation expectations of households, as measured in confidence and low pricing power of firms. Since
the Reserve Bank survey, softened. March 2020 the inflation outlook has become highly
uncertain due to the COVID-19 outbreak turning
Manufacturing firms polled for the purchasing
into a pandemic. Crude oil prices have collapsed to
managers’ index (PMI) reported modest increases in
lows not seen since early 2000s. With several major
input prices and stable output prices in Q4. Input
economies in lockdown mode, demand conditions
prices, however, firmed up markedly in case of the
PMI services firms in Q4 (up to February) driven may weaken sharply. Accordingly, countries across
by higher food, labour and material costs before the world are bracing up for deflationary forces to
slowing sharply in March 2020 amid lower food and take hold. India may not be immune to these extreme
fuel prices, and reduced demand. Prices charged by downside pressures imparted by the pandemic. With
services firms remained broadly range bound in Q3 the entire country in lockdown, the NSO would
and Q4 but softened in March 2020 with some firms face considerable challenges in compilation and
reducing their fees due to weak demand conditions. measurement of consumer prices.

Chapter III Demand and Output
III. Demand and Output
The deterioration in aggregate demand conditions in 2019-20, was exacerbated by contraction in investment, and
moderation in government expenditure in H2. On the supply side, agriculture and allied activities accelerated,
buoyed by the late surge in south-west monsoon rainfall and bountiful north-east monsoon precipitation. However,
industrial growth decelerated, led by a slowdown in manufacturing activity. Services sector activity moderated,
pulled down by a slowdown in construction; trade, hotels, transport and communication; and public administration,
defence and other services.
The February 2020 data release by the National for January and February 2020 either moderating
Statistical Office (NSO) reveals that a sequential or declining, barring PMI, cement production and
slowdown set in upon the Indian economy from railway freight traffic. Public administration, defence
Q1:2018-19. Over H2:2018-19 and H1:2019-20, real and other services (PADO) remained robust in Q2 and
Q3. However, during January-February 2020, centre’s
GDP growth lost momentum further, averaging 5.5 per
revenue expenditure excluding interest payments
cent. The sub-5 per cent reading for Q3:2019-20 (4.7
and subsidies grew marginally. Beginning March, the
per cent) has caused heightened uncertainty about the
lockdown in the wake of the outbreak of COVID-19 has
outlook. The oppressive force of the novel coronavirus
choked manufacturing activities. Anecdotal evidence
(COVID-19) on weak or moderating high frequency
suggests that in the manufacturing sector, dislocations
indicators of activity, barring agriculture, indicates
of labour adversely impacted automobiles, electronic
that the implicit real GDP growth for Q4:2019-20 in
goods and appliances, and apparel. Services such as
the NSO’s data release could be undershot by a fair
trade, tourism, airlines, the hospitality sector and
margin. In fact, the widening incidence of COVID-19
construction have been hit hard.
in March 2020 may produce downward pulls to Q4
III.1 Aggregate Demand
GDP.
The deterioration in aggregate demand conditions
Underlying this marked downturn relative to recent
in 2019-20, was exacerbated by contraction (1.3 per
experience is the contraction in gross fixed capital
cent) in gross fixed capital formation, and moderation
formation (GFCF) from Q2:2019-20. Consumption
in government expenditure in H2. Although private
demand accelerated and sustained overall demand,
consumption held up in sequential terms, it was
driven mainly by a sharp pick up in government
slower in H2:2019-20 on a y-o-y basis (Chart III.1a
final consumption expenditure (GFCE). Net exports
and Table III.1). Overall, the drag on GDP growth
also contributed positively to aggregate demand, but
in H2:2019-20 can be decoded to unfavourable base
essentially because the contraction in imports outpaced
effects, since momentum – measured by the q-o-q
the decline in exports. On the supply side, agriculture
seasonally adjusted annualised growth rate (SAAR) -
and allied activities imparted momentum to gross accelerated in H2 (Chart III.1b). With COVID-19 having
value added (GVA) in Q2 and Q3, buoyed by increases taken a grievous toll in February and particularly
in kharif and horticulture production. The industrial in March, it is unlikely that this momentum was
sector remained moribund, bound down by weak sustained as the year closed. Accordingly, the NSO’s
demand conditions, and hence weak pricing power. estimate of real GDP growth for the year as a whole at
In the services sector, activity has been weakening 5.0 per cent in 2019-20, which itself was down from
through H2:2019-20 with high frequency indicators 6.1 per cent in 2018-19, may be at risk.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart III.1: Seasonally Adjusted GDP Growth and its Constituents
a: Weighted Contribution of the Components to b: GDP Growth and its Momentum
GDP Growth
Notes: 1. # - Implicit growth. 2. SAAR – Seasonally adjusted annualised rate.
Sources: National Statistical Office (NSO); and RBI staff estimates.
In the absence of hard data on underlying activity on the state of the economy. A sentiment index (SI),
from traditional sources, availability of high frequency prepared on the basis of daily news feed in print
information in large volumes, either structured media is able to track economic activity relatively well
or unstructured, varying in form and content, has in the Indian context. The SI indicates weak activity in
opened up avenues for extracting meaningful signals Q4:2019-20 (Box III.1).
Table III.1: Real GDP Growth
(y-o-y, per cent)
Item 2018-19 2019-20 Weighted 2018-19 (FRE) 2019-20 (SAE)
(FRE) (SAE) Contribution*
2018-19 2019-20 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4#
Private final consumption expenditure 7.2 5.3 4.0 3.0 6.7 8.8 7.0 6.2 5.0 5.6 5.9 4.9
Government final consumption expenditure 10.1 9.8 1.0 1.0 8.5 10.8 7.0 14.4 8.8 13.2 11.8 4.9
Gross fixed capital formation 9.8 -0.6 3.0 -0.2 12.9 11.5 11.4 4.4 4.3 -4.1 -5.2 2.5
Exports 12.3 -1.9 2.4 -0.4 9.5 12.5 15.8 11.6 3.2 -2.1 -5.5 -2.8
Imports 8.6 -5.5 2.0 -1.3 5.9 18.7 10.0 0.8 2.1 -9.3 -11.2 -3.0
GDP at market prices 6.1 5.0 6.1 5.0 7.1 6.2 5.6 5.7 5.6 5.1 4.7 4.7
FRE: First Revised Estimates; SAE: Second Advance Estimates; #: Implicit growth.
*: Component-wise contributions to growth do not add up to GDP growth in the table because change in stocks, valuables and discrepancies are not
included.
Source: NSO.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Box: III.1: Media Sentiments on Economic Growth – A Machine Learning Approach
Big data tools and machine learning (ML) techniques such as natural language processing (NLP) and text mining have
facilitated extraction and construction of numerical indicators out of news text (Shapiro et. al. 2018). The broad approach
is to extract sentiment from daily news items pertaining to variables of interest (Godbole et. al. 2007). Each news item
is classified into one of three sentiment classes, viz., positive, negative and neutral, based on the words present in the
news. News items with no sentiments or those that are unrelated are discarded. A sentiment class explicitly represents
words with similar semantic orientation as illustrated below (Chart III.1.1).
Chart III.1.1: Semantic Orientation of Words
a: Positive Sentiment b: Negative Sentiment c: Neutral Sentiment
Source: RBI staff estimates.
Relevant news items under positive/ negative/ neutral
Chart III.1.2: Sentiment vis-a-vis GDP and GVA Growth
sentiment class are consolidated and summarised into a
Sentiment Index (SI)1, as defined below:
SI = news items with “positive” sentiment (%) –
news items with “negative” sentiment (%)
For this analysis, daily news feeds for the period April 2015
to March 2020 have been sourced from media intelligence
firm (Meltwater) and aggregated to derive a quarterly
Sentiment Index to track upturns and downturns in year-
on-year (y-o-y) growth in real GDP and GVA (Chart III.1.2).
The association between sentiment index and economic
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
activity (GDP or GVA growth) is measured in terms of
correlation. Directional precision is measured in terms of
a Sign Success Ratio (SSR)2 which is the proportion of time (a) Denote as the variable representing whether the
periods when the direction indicated by SI matches the year on year growth for the quarter has increased/
directional change in GDP/GVA growth and is defined as decreased/remained same sequentially and defined
follows: by
(contd.)
1 The range of SI is -100 to 100. While a positive (negative) value of SI indicates optimism/ improvement (pessimism/deterioration), a zero value is
associated with neutral sentiment.
2 A high value of SSR, which is close to 100 in a scale of 0 to 100, indicates that media sentiment is able to gauge directional changes in the macroeconomic
variables of interest (Buono et. al. 2018).

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Table III.1.1: Statistical Association between SI and
GDP/GVA Growth
….. (1)
GDP growth (Y-o-Y) GVA growth (Y-o-Y)
where, is Y-o-Y growth in GDP or GVA for quarter t.
Correlation with SI 0.62* 0.71*
(b) Denote as the variable indicating whether the
SSR of SI (%) 58 74
sentiment index for the quarter is positive/negative/
*Statistically significant at 5 per cent level of significance
neutral and defined by
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
Unconventional big data sources, such as news in online
print media that are available on a high frequency basis
….. (2) complement survey-based gauges of the pulse of the
economy. However, machine learning techniques are
(c) Denote as an indicator function for the quarter
usually difficult to comprehend with macroeconomic
capturing whether the sequential direction of GDP/
interlinkages and are generally treated as additional
GVA growth and the sentiment index of the quarter
monitoring techniques.
are directionally matching or not. It is defined by
References:
Buono, D., Kapetanios, G., Marcellino, M., Mazzi, G., and
….. (3)
Papailias, F. (2018), “Big Data Econometrics: Now Casting
Under the above settings, the sign success ratio ( ) is and Early Estimates”, Milan, Bocconi University, Baffi-
defined as Carefin Centre working paper 82.
Godbole, N., Srinvasaiah, M., and Skiena, S. (2007), “Large-
….. (4) Scale Sentiment Analysis for News and Blogs”, Conference
Proceedings of the International Conference on Weblogs
where n is the total number of quarters under consideration
and Social Media, January.
(during Q1: 2015-16 to Q3:2019-20).
Kumari, Shweta and Giddi, Geetha (2020), “Inflation
The Sentiment index is found to be strongly correlated
Decoded through Power of Words”, Mimeo.
with both GDP and GVA growth and it is able to gauge the
directional change satisfactorily (Table III.1.1). Sentiment Shapiro, Adam Hale, Moritz Sudhof, Daniel Wilson (2018),
index reveals subdued economic activities for the fourth “Measuring News Sentiment”, Federal Reserve Bank of
quarter of 2019-20. San Francisco Working Paper 2017-01.
GDP Projections versus Actual Outcomes
Chart III.2: GDP Growth - Projections
versus Actual
The October 2019 Monetary Policy Report (MPR)
projected GDP growth at 5.3 per cent for Q2:2019-
20, 6.6 per cent for Q3 and 7.2 per cent for Q4, with
risks evenly balanced around this baseline path
(Chart III.2). Actual outcomes in terms of the NSO’s
second advance estimates (SAE) undershot these
projections by 20 and 190 basis points in Q2 and Q3,
respectively. The downward surprise in Q2 stemmed
from a stronger than anticipated drag from gross fixed
capital formation and marginal weakness in private
final consumption expenditure. In Q3, projection
errors emanated mainly from a steep unanticipated
contraction in gross fixed capital formation, which
was the deepest in the new series of GDP. Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.3: Select indicators - Export Demand in Chart III.5: Select Indicators - Rural Demand
Labour-intensive Sectors
Source: Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence & Statistics (DGCI&S). Sources: Tractor Manufactures Association; SIAM; and NSO.
III.1.1 Private Final Consumption Expenditure High frequency indicators of urban consumption
demand present a subdued picture for Q4:2019-20
Private final consumption expenditure (PFCE) remains
(Chart III.4a). Sales of passenger vehicles continued
the mainstay of aggregate demand, with its share at
to contract in February 2020. Domestic air passenger
57.6 per cent in H2:2019-20. The slowdown in PFCE
traffic growth slowed in January 2020. Consumer
in H2:2019-20 was caused by a combination of factors
durables growth contracted in January 2020. Even
— weak rural demand due to depressed food prices/
though there has been some uptick in vehicle
inflation in the previous two years; deceleration in
loan growth for households and growth in credit
rural wages; and downturn in labour-intensive exports
card outstanding in February 2020, overall, urban
which impacted rural consumption; and slowdown consumption appears to have lost steam in Q4 with
in urban consumption due to decelerating incomes the outbreak of COVID-19 having accentuated the
(Chart III.3). moderation (Chart III.4b).
Chart III.4: High Frequency Indicators: Consumption Demand
a: High Frequency Indicators - Urban Demand b: Household Credit
Sources: Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA); Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM); NSO; and RBI.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Among the indicators of rural consumption, sales, however, improved in January and steadied
motorcycle sales remained in contraction in further in February 2020, reflecting improved
February 2020 (Chart III.5). This sector faces some rabi sowing. The consumer non-durable segment
uncertainty following the change in emission remained in contraction, reflecting weak rural
norms, which was to be effective from April. Tractor demand (Box III.2).
Box III.2: What Ails Rural Demand?
The performance of agriculture is key to the state of
Chart III.2.3: Wholesale Prices of Major Essential
rural demand. In recent years, the terms of trade (ToT)
Agricultural Commodities
have moved against the farm economy, with back-to-back
bumper harvests during 2016, 2017 and 2018 causing a a. Cereals and Pulses
decline in some food prices/inflation (Chart III.2.1). In
the face of a global food supply glut, India’s exports of
agricultural products were affected and consequently,
they could not fulfil their usual vent for surplus role (Chart
III.2.2). The excess supply resulting in an accumulation of
stocks depressed agriculture commodities prices/inflation
even further (Chart III.2.3).
The index of inter-sectoral ToT, i.e., the ratio of agriculture
GVA deflator to non-agriculture GVA deflator declined b. Vegetables
between 2016-17 and 2018-19 (Chart III.2.4). An alternative
Chart III.2.1: Domestic Food Availability
c. Sugar and Milk
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (MOAFW).
Chart III.2.2: Agriculture Exports and Imports
d. Edible Oil
Source: Department of Consumer Affairs, Government of India.
Source: Agricultural & Processed Foods Product Export Development
Authority. (contd.)

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.2.4: Inter-sectoral Terms of Trade between Agriculture and Non-Agriculture
a: GVA Deflator based Terms of Trade (Agri to non-Agri) b: Wholesale Price Index based Terms of Trade (ToT)
Sources: NSO; Office of Economic Adviser; and RBI staff estimates.
measure – the ratio of the wholesale price index (WPI) The recent outbreak of COVID-19 and the subsequent
between agriculture and non-agriculture (excluding lockdown enforced in the country are expected to bring
services) – corroborates this loss of ToT. down the aggregate demand drastically, both in rural and
urban areas. The Government has announced a slew of
Alongside these developments, growth in rural wages has
measures like direct cash transfer to farmers, hiking wages
remained subdued, particularly for agricultural labour in
under the MGNREGA scheme, and utilisation of welfare
both nominal and real terms, partly due to the slowdown
funds for construction workers to offset the adverse
in the construction sector (Chart III.2.5).
impact on rural demand. However, given the severity
Moreover, in recent years, the Mahatma Gandhi National
of the pandemic, rural demand is expected to go down
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) scheme
further at least in the near future.
does not seem to support rural income much due to
delayed wage payments, lower wages and insufficient In conclusion, unusually lower agriculture prices,
budgetary allocations. The Periodic Labour Force Survey slowdown in the construction sector and below average
(PLFS) report released by the NSO in May 2019 shows that performance of the flagship MGNREGA programme have
wages under MGNREGA work are lower than the market contributed to lower farm incomes, deceleration in rural
wage rate for non-public work by 74 per cent for rural men wages and loss of employment opportunities in the rural
and 21 per cent for rural women. sector and, more so, in the wake of COVID-19.
Chart III.2.5: Growth in Nominal and Real Rural Wages
a: Growth in Nominal Rural Wages b: Growth in Real Rural Wages
Sources: Labour Bureau, Ministry of Labour and Employment; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
III.1.2 Gross Fixed Capital Formation vehicles, cement, petroleum, telecommunications
and construction (Chart III.7). Funds mobilised by
Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) growth turned
these corporates during H1:2019-20 were mainly used
negative in Q2 and Q3:2019-20. Consequently, the
for fixed assets formation and deleveraging (reduced
share of GFCF in GDP dropped to 30.2 per cent in 2019-
borrowing). The total cost of projects sanctioned/
20 from 31.9 per cent a year ago. Two key indicators
contracted by major financing channels also increased
of investment demand, viz., production and imports
in H1:2019-20 over H1:2018-19.
of capital goods have remained in contraction in
January/February 2020 as well (Chart III.6a). As regards As per the first revised estimates, gross domestic
construction activity, finished steel consumption saving (GDS) rate decreased to 30.1 per cent of GDP
contracted in February, while cement production in 2018-19 from 32.4 per cent in 2017-18. The saving
grew significantly. The performance of software firms rate of the household sector, which is a net supplier
– a proxy for investment in intellectual property
of funds to the economy, declined from 23.6 per cent
products – has remained resilient, as evident from the
of GDP in 2011-12 to 18.2 per cent in 2018-19. While
latest financial results. Seasonally adjusted capacity
the private corporate sector finances its investment
utilisation (CU-SA) in the manufacturing sector
predominantly through its own savings, the public
declined below the long-term average in Q3:2019-20,
sector continues to rely heavily on households
corroborating that the need for fresh investment is
for financing its deficit (Chart III.8). During April-
depressed as also reflected in a slowdown in adjusted
December 2019, household financial savings appeared
non-food bank credit (ANFC) (Chart III.6b).
to have improved as households’ liabilities declined
Half-yearly unaudited financial statements of listed more than the increase in household deposits
non-government non-financial (NGNF) companies with scheduled commercial banks whereas their
suggest a rise in the capex ratio3 in H1:2019-20 from investment in insurance and mutual funds remained
H2:2018-19 across major industries such as motor at the same level as in the previous year.
Chart III.6: Investment Demand
a: Indicators of Investment Demand b: Capacity Utilisation in Manufacturing
Sources: DGCI&S; NSO; and RBI.
3 Capex ratio is defined as [net fixed assets (current half year) - net fixed assets (previous half year) + depreciation (current half year)]/net fixed assets
(previous half year).

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.7: Leverage and Investment Activity
a: H2:2018-19 b: H1:2019-20
Notes: 1. Leverage ratio: debt-equity ratio.
2. Size of the bubble denotes the net fixed assets held by the industries as at end-March 2019 (chart a) and end-September 2019 (chart b).
3. Analysis is based on 2,362 listed non-government non-financial (NGNF) companies common for the half years H1:2018-19, H2:2018-19 and H1:2019-20.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
III.1.3 Government Expenditure 2020-21, revenue expenditure is budgeted higher than
in 2019-20 revised estimates (RE) (Table III.2).
Growth in government final consumption expenditure
(GFCE) moderated in H2:2019-20 due to a sharp During 2019-20 (April-February), the fiscal position
slowdown in Q4 as implicit in the SAE released by of the central government deteriorated mainly due
the NSO. During January-February 2020, revenue to a decline in gross revenue under corporation tax,
expenditure of the Centre grew by 3.9 per cent. In reflecting mid-year cut in tax rates. GST collections at
`5.5 lakh crore were 89.5 per cent of RE and 4.5 per
Chart III.8: Saving Investment Gap cent higher than a year ago. On the whole, direct taxes
Table III.2: Key Fiscal Indicators – Central
Government Finances
(Per cent to GDP)
Indicator 2019-20 2019-20 2020-21
(BE) (RE) (BE)
1. Revenue Receipts 9.3 9.1 9.0
a. Tax Revenue (Net) 7.8 7.4 7.3
b. Non-Tax Revenue 1.5 1.7 1.7
2. Non-Debt Capital Receipts 0.6 0.4 1.0
3. Revenue Expenditure 11.6 11.5 11.7
4. Capital Expenditure 1.6 1.7 1.8
5. Total Expenditure 13.2 13.2 13.5
6. Gross Fiscal Deficit 3.3 3.8 3.5
7. Revenue Deficit 2.3 2.4 2.7
8. Primary Deficit 0.2 0.7 0.4
Note: BE: Budget Estimates. RE: Revised Estimates.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
Source: Union Budget, 2020-21.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart III.9: Tax Collection during April- February
a: Direct Taxes b. Indirect Taxes
Source: Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance.
contracted by 3.3 per cent, while indirect taxes grew Under the provisions of section 4(3) of the revised
barely by 1.6 per cent in the first 11 months of the year, FRBM Act, which can be invoked under specific
lower than the budget estimates (BE) (Chart III.9 a & b). conditions4, the Centre’s GFD was revised up to 3.8
per cent of GDP in 2019-20 (RE) from the budgeted
Revenue expenditure growth also stood lower than
3.3 per cent, due to a shortfall in tax revenue and
the RE mainly due to lower interest payments.
Outgoes on account of major subsidies moderated disinvestment proceeds. The implications of these
from the BE of 1.4 per cent of GDP to 1.1 per cent evolving dynamics can be examined in a general
in RE due to curtailment of on-budget food subsidy. equilibrium framework (Box III.3). The GFD is
Nonetheless, food subsidy continues to dominate the budgeted to moderate to 3.5 per cent of GDP in 2020-
overall subsidy bill. Capital expenditure growth was 21 and in a glide path it will return to 3.1 per cent
also lower than in the RE. by 2022-23.
Box III.3 Augmenting Quarterly Projection Model (QPM): Fiscal Block
Fiscal policy measures can impact output, inflation and Salient features of the fiscal block in the QPM are the
monetary policy decisions and vice versa (Government of following: (a) headline fiscal deficit is decomposed into
India, 2017). However, all fiscal measures need not affect structural and cyclical primary deficits and interest
the macroeconomic variables in a similar way. The various payments; (b) the cyclical component of the primary deficit
conduits of fiscal-monetary interface and their impact on depends on the state of the economy and recognises that
growth and inflation are assessed by incorporating a fiscal government tax revenue will be lower and expenditure will
block in RBI’s Quarterly Projection Model (QPM)5. be higher leading to higher fiscal deficit when the overall
(contd.)
4 On ground or grounds of national security, act of war, national calamity, collapse of agriculture severely affecting farm output and incomes, structural
reforms in the economy with unanticipated fiscal implications, and decline in real output growth of a quarter by at least three per cent points below its
average of the previous four quarters (Source: Finance Act, 2018).
5 The QPM is a semi-structural, forward-looking, open economy, calibrated, gap model in the New Keynesian tradition and provides an internally consistent
analysis of various feedback mechanisms.

Chapter III Demand and Output
economy slows down and vice versa; (c) deviation of the
Chart III.3.1: Monetary-Fiscal Linkages
fiscal deficit from the announced fiscal path on account
of cyclically-adjusted (i.e., structural – the part of fiscal
deficit which is not related to the state of the economy)
component of the primary deficit is a fiscal impulse and
contributes to aggregate demand; (d) link between debt
dynamics and fiscal deficit is identified for stock-flow
consistency (Escolano, 2010); (e) the fiscal deficit and debt
has implications for the country risk premium and the
exchange rate; and (f) monetary policy’s interaction with
the fiscal deficit is captured through interest payments
(Chart III.3.1).
The model’s dynamics indicate that a shock to the In 2019-20, the GDP growth has slowed down, which
cyclically-adjusted (structural) fiscal deficit impacts contributed to an increase in the fiscal deficit mainly
aggregate demand. The higher level of debt to finance on account of (a) lower aggregate demand (denominator),
higher fiscal deficit leads to increase in country risk (b) lower fiscal revenue due to lower economic activity,
premium and exchange rate depreciation. Thus, inflation and (c) higher fiscal expenditure on account of the
gets impacted through both the aggregate demand and measures to address the economic slowdown. Thus,
a considerable portion of the fiscal deficit deviation in
exchange rate channels. However, if the deviation of the
2019-20 could be attributed to cyclical factors. In such
headline fiscal position from the announced path is on
scenario, the inflationary impact of this deviation was
account of cyclical factors, the impact on inflation and
largely subdued.
output would be muted (Chart III.3.2).
Chart III.3.2: Structural and Cyclical Fiscal Deficit: Impact on Output and Inflation
a. Fiscal Deficit b. Output Gap c. Inflation
Source: RBI staff estimates.
References:
Escolano, M. J. (2010), “A Practical Guide to Public Debt Dynamics, Fiscal Sustainability, and Cyclical Adjustment of
Budgetary Aggregates”, Technical Notes and Manuals 10/02, International Monetary Fund.
Government of India (2017), “Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Review Committee” (Chairman: N.K Singh).

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
out during H2:2019-20 with the objective of managing
Table III.3: State Government Finances -
Key Deficit Indicators redemption and enhancing liquidity of government
(per cent to GSDP) securities. Furthermore, cash management bills
Item 2018-19 2019-20 2019-20 2020-21 worth `2,50,000 crore were issued on seven occasions
(BE) (RE) (BE)
during H2:2019-20 to tide over frequent recourse to
Revenue Deficit 0.1 0.1 0.7 0.0
Gross Fiscal deficit 2.4 2.5 2.9 2.4 ways and means advances/overdrafts in the face of
negative cash balances with the Reserve Bank. States
Notes: 1. Negative (-) sign indicates surplus.
2. Data pertain to 22 out of 28 States. completed their gross borrowings of `6,34,521 crore
3. GSDP is the sum of GSDP of respective 22 states.
Sources: Budget Documents of State Governments. for the year (Table III.4).
III.1.4 External Demand
Based on the latest available data, the gross fiscal deficit
of 22 states increased to 2.9 per cent of their gross state Net exports contributed positively to aggregate
domestic product (GSDP) in 2019-20 (RE) from the demand in H2:2019-20, with imports contracting
budgeted 2.5 per cent (Table III.3). The deviation was more sharply than exports (Chart 10).
mainly caused by lower revenue – both own and central
According to data released by the Directorate General
transfer – due to the slowdown in economic activity,
of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCI&S),
which, in turn, induced states to cut both revenue and
the contraction in merchandise exports, which started
capital expenditure in an adverse feedback loop that
in Q1:2019-20, accentuated in Q2, as the slump in
further weakened aggregate demand. For 2020-21,
shipment of engineering goods, gems and jewellery,
states have budgeted a consolidated GFD of 2.4 per
cotton and handloom products, and rice became
cent of GSDP, anticipating higher revenue and lower
pronounced in the face of a prolonged slowdown
expenditure than a year ago.
in world trade and demand. The pace of overall
Under the centre’s market borrowing programme export contraction moderated during Q3:2019-20,
during 2019-20, that is managed by the Reserve and eventually there was a turnaround in February,
Bank, gross borrowings were `2,68,000 crore during supported by petroleum, oil and lubricants (POL),
H2:2019-20, as compared to `2,83,000 crore during engineering goods, electronic goods and chemicals
H2:2018-19, i.e., lower by 5.3 per cent than their level (Chart III.11a). Overall, exports shrank by 1.5 per cent
a year ago. Net market borrowings during H2:2019-20 during April-February 2019-20, though the adverse
at `1,33,000 crore were also 43.2 per cent lower. As impact of COVID-19 on global supply chains and
part of active debt consolidation, seven tranches of global economic activity more generally may dent
switch operations worth `1,24,694 crore were carried export performance in March.
Table III.4: Government Market Borrowings
(` crore)
Item 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
Centre States Total Centre States Total Centre States Total
Net Borrowings 4,48,410 3,40,281 7,88,691 4,22,737 3,48,643 7,71,380 4,73,972 4,87,454 9,61,426
Gross Borrowings 5,88,000 4,19,100 10,07,100 5,71,000 4,78,323 10,49,323 7,10,000 6,34,521 13,44,521
Sources: Government of India; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.10. Growth in Trade
a: Merchandise Trade b: Services Trade
*: Provisional.
Sources: DGCI&S; and RBI.
Imports contracted in Q2:2019-20, pulled down by April-February 2018-19 to US$ 143.1 billion in April-
gold, POL and non-POL non-gold imports (Chart February 2019-20. India’s oil import bill is expected to
III.11b). Within the latter, the decline was broad-based decline in March with a steep fall in crude oil prices
and covered sectors such as transport equipment,
and this may compress the trade deficit further for the
pearls and precious stones, coal and chemicals.
full year.
Imports also contracted in Q3 and in January 2020,
The current account deficit (CAD) narrowed to 0.2
but expanded in February, driven by POL, pearls and
per cent of GDP in Q3:2019-20 from 0.9 per cent in
precious stones and machinery. Overall, imports
contracted by 7.3 per cent during April-February Q2:2019-20 and from 2.7 per cent in Q3 a year ago. The
2019-20. With imports declining more than exports, contraction in the CAD was primarily on account of a
the trade deficit narrowed from US$ 173.0 billion in lower trade deficit and a rise in net services receipts.
Chart III.11: Relative Contribution to Export and Import Growth
a. Relative Contribution: Exports Growth b. Relative Contribution: Imports Growth
Sources: DGCI&S; and CPB Netherlands.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Services exports grew on the back of a rise in net those of US$ 2.0 billion a year ago. Net International
earnings from software, travel and financial services Investment Position (IIP), i.e., the difference between
(Chart 10.b). Remittances from overseas Indians were a country’s external financial assets and liabilities,
strong in Q3:2019-20, while the net outgo of payments improved during Q3:2019-20 over Q2. India’s foreign
due to investment income and compensation of exchange reserves were placed at US$ 475.6 billion,
employees together, remained broadly unchanged equivalent to 11.8 months of import, as on March 27,
from the previous year. 2020 – an increase of US$ 62.7 billion over the level at
end-March 2019.
Net capital inflows exceeded the CAD in Q3:2019-
20. Net foreign direct investment (FDI) flows at US$ III.2 Aggregate Supply
37.8 billion in April-January 2019-20 were higher than
Gross value added (GVA) growth at basic prices – the
those a year ago, flowing mainly to manufacturing,
metric for aggregate supply – decelerated to 4.7 per
communication, retail and wholesale trade, financial
cent in H2:2019-20 from 5.1 per cent in H1 and 5.6
and computer services. Amidst growing risk aversion
per cent in H2:2018-19 (Table III.5). This deceleration
on fears of global recession in the wake of COVID-19
can be attributed to base effects to a large extent since
pandemic, foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) turned net
its momentum measured in terms of q-o-q SAAR
sellers beginning February 18, 2020. Foreign portfolio
accelerated to 5.6 per cent in H2 from 4.2 per cent in
investment (FPI) outflows accentuated further from
H1 (Chart III.12a). With COVID-19 impacting the GVA
March 6, 2020 as the oil price war between Saudi
in the last phase of Q4 strongly, it is unlikely that this
Arabia and Russia caused fresh turbulence in global
momentum would be maintained as the year closed.
financial markets. Overall, FPI outflows were of the
order of US$ 7.1 billion in 2019-20 (up to March 31, The slowdown in y-o-y GVA growth reflected the
2020). Under the voluntary retention route, however, deceleration in industrial and services activities. On
net investment by FPIs amounted to US$ 8.7 billion the other hand, GVA growth in agriculture and allied
up to March 31, 2020. Net disbursals under external activities accelerated in H2:2019-20 in comparison
commercial borrowings (ECBs) by Indian entities with both H1:2019-20 and H2:2018-19, buoyed by
at US$ 3.2 billion in Q3:2019-20 were higher than the late surge in south-west monsoon rainfall and
Table III.5: Sector-wise Growth in GVA
(y-o-y, per cent)
Sector 2018-19 2019-20 Weighted 2018-19 (FRE) 2019-20 (SAE)
(FRE) (SAE) 2019-20
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4#
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 2.4 3.7 0.5 3.8 2.5 2.0 1.6 2.8 3.1 3.5 5.0
Industry 4.5 1.5 0.3 7.8 4.7 4.4 1.4 3.2 0.1 0.1 2.3
Mining and quarrying -5.8 2.8 0.1 -7.3 -7.0 -4.4 -4.8 4.7 0.2 3.2 2.6
Manufacturing 5.7 0.9 0.2 10.7 5.6 5.2 2.1 2.2 -0.4 -0.2 1.8
Electricity, gas, water supply and other utilities 8.2 4.6 0.1 7.9 9.9 9.5 5.5 8.8 3.9 -0.7 6.5
Services 7.5 6.5 4.1 7.3 7.2 7.3 8.3 6.7 6.8 6.4 6.1
Construction 6.1 3.0 0.2 6.4 5.2 6.6 6.0 5.5 2.9 0.3 3.2
Trade, hotels, transport, communication 7.7 5.6 1.1 8.5 7.8 7.8 6.9 5.7 5.8 5.9 5.1
Financial, real estate and professional services 6.8 7.3 1.6 6.0 6.5 6.5 8.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 8.0
Public administration, defence and other services 9.4 8.8 1.1 8.8 8.9 8.1 11.6 8.7 10.1 9.7 6.7
GVA at basic prices 6.0 4.9 4.9 6.9 6.1 5.6 5.6 5.4 4.8 4.5 5.0
FRE: First Revised Estimates; SAE: Second Advance Estimates. #: Implicit growth.
Source: NSO.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.12: GVA Growth
a: GVA Growth: y-o-y and q-o-q SAAR b: GVA Growth: excluding PADO
# : Implied
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
bountiful north-east monsoon precipitation. Based
Table III.6: Agricultural Production in 2019-20
on the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare’s (Second Advance Estimates)
second advance estimates, production of all major (in Lakh Tonnes)
food grains, except urad and moong, in 2019-20 was Crop 2018-19 2019-20 2019-20 Variation
(Per cent)
higher than the final estimates of the preceding year.
2nd Final Target 2nd Over Over Over
Public administration, defence and other services
AE AE 2nd AE Final Target
(PADO) continued to provide support to overall supply 2018-19 2018-19
conditions (Chart 12b). Foodgrains 2814 2852 2911 2920 3.8 2.4 0.3
Rice 1156 1165 1160 1175 1.6 0.8 1.3
III.2.1 Agriculture
Wheat 991 1036 1005 1062 7.2 2.5 5.7
GVA growth at basic prices in agriculture and allied Pulses 240 221 263 230 -4.2 4.3 -12.5
activities accelerated in H2:2019-20 to 4.2 per cent Oilseeds 315 315 361 342 8.5 8.5 -5.3
from 3.0 per cent in H1:2019-20. Acreage of rabi Sugarcane 3808 4054 3855 3538 -7.1 -12.7 -8.2
crops increased by 9.5 per cent, underpinned by the Cotton # 301 280 358 349 16 24.4 -2.4
favourable northeast monsoon, sufficient reservoir Jute & Mesta ## 101 98 112 98 -2.6 -0.1 -12.4
levels, improved soil moisture and an increase in #: Lakh bales of 170 kgs. each.
##: Lakh bales of 180 kgs. each.
prices for agricultural commodities. The second Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Government of
India.
advance estimates of crop production for 2019-20
placed kharif and rabi foodgrain production higher
by 0.6 and 4.1 per cent, respectively (Table III.6). Allied activities, including livestock, forestry and
Horticultural production was placed at a record level fishing, constitute about 40 per cent of the GVA in
of 3,133.5 lakh tonnes during 2019-20, 0.8 per cent agriculture and allied sector and contributed four-
higher than the final estimates for 2018-19 and driven fifths of overall agricultural GVA growth during
largely by production of vegetables. 2012-19 (Chart III.13).

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart III.13: Contribution of Crops and Chart III.14: Weighted Contribution
Allied Activities to Industrial GVA Growth
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates. Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
According to the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric weak domestic and external demand. The mining
Administration (NOAA), near- to above-average sea sector growth picked up, but electricity generation
surface temperatures (SSTs) prevailed across the weakened.
equatorial Pacific Ocean during March 2020. There
Among the high frequency indicators, the index of
is 65 per cent chance of ENSO6-neutral prevailing in
industrial production (IIP) emerged out of contraction
the spring and 55 per cent chance in the summer of
in November 2019 and remained in positive territory
2020. The Australian Bureau of Meteorology (BoM)
in the following two months. The truncated IIP, by
has indicated that the ENSO Outlook is neutral,
taking 96 per cent of IIP, i.e., excluding top 2 per cent
suggesting low or no possibility of El Niño or La
and bottom 2 per cent of volatile items, improved
Niña developing in the coming months. Skymet
marginally in January 2020 (Chart III.15a).
expects neutral conditions to prevail during monsoon
Manufacturing IIP contracted in Q3:2019-20, pulled
months with more than 50 per cent probability. The
down by a decline in the production of motor
India Meteorological Department also expects ENSO-
vehicles, machinery and equipment, computer,
neutral conditions to prevail during April-June 2020.
electronic and optical products, fabricated metal
III.2.2 Industrial Sector
products, rubber and plastics products. Of the 23
In the industrial sector, GVA growth at basic prices industry groups constituting the IIP, 17 contracted
decelerated to 1.3 per cent in H2:2019-20 from 1.7 during Q3 as against 15 during Q2. In terms of the
per cent in the preceding half, and 2.8 per cent a use-based classification, the intermediate goods sector
year ago (Chart III. 14). It was the deceleration in the grew by double digits in Q3:2019-20 led by growth in
manufacturing sector – the dominant component mild steel (MS) slabs. On the other hand, consumer
of industry – that deepened this slowdown, due to non-durables slipped into contraction (Chart III.15b).
6 "ENSO" refers to the El Niño-Southern Oscillation, the interaction between the atmosphere and ocean in the tropical Pacific that results in a somewhat
periodic variation between below-normal and above-normal sea surface temperatures and dry and wet conditions over the course of a few years.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.15: IIP and Use-based Classification
a: Exclusion-based IIP b: Use-based Contribution to IIP Growth
Source: NSO.
Primary goods, infrastructure and consumer durables the source of two-thirds of energy supply. Electricity
remained in contraction in Q3. The consumer durables generation increased in December-January 2020,
segment contracted in Q3:2019-20 due to the decline after six months of contraction (Chart III.16). In the
in production of two wheelers, TV sets and auto mining sector, production picked up marginally in
components. The capital goods sector also remained H2 but remained weak. Recent announcements by
in contraction in Q3 mainly due to weak investment the Government such as doing away with end-use
demand pertaining especially to commercial vehicles restrictions in coal mining, extending the validity of
and power generation.
In January 2020, while the IIP growth was positive at
Chart III.16: Electricity Generation and
2.0 per cent, this was also broad-based. However, its
Demand Growth
sustainability in the near term seems to be uncertain
in view of supply chain disruptions caused by
COVID-19 and weak automobile sales. Intermediate
goods continued to register robust growth emanating
mostly from mild steel slabs, which contributed 197
basis points to headline IIP growth in January. Capital
goods production continued to contract, taking the
sequential decline to its thirteenth consecutive
month.
Electricity generation decelerated in H2 in
comparison with H1, reflective of low demand from
the organised manufacturing sector amidst extended
monsoon season. This subdued performance was
Source: Central Electricity Authority.
mainly on account of thermal power generation,

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
clearances for mining leases and opening up of this due to deterioration in new export business as well as
sector to new participants may spur activity in this business expectations.
sector.
III.2.3 Services
The Reserve Bank’s business assessment of the
Service sector activity moderated in H2:2019-20,
industrial outlook survey (IOS)7 showed improvement
pulled down by a slowdown in construction and
in Q4:2019-20, with the sentiment on employment
trade, hotels, transport and communication and PADO
conditions slightly improved. In view of the
(Chart III.17a). The slowdown in the construction
intensification of COVID-19, a quick survey with
sector was reflected in a decline in one of its key
select parameters was specially conducted during
indicators, viz., cement production (Chart III.17b).
March 18-20 to capture the updated sentiments
Growth in trade, hotels, transport, communication
of the enterprises. The limited responses received
and services related to broadcasting was muted
indicate a considerable worsening of the key demand
in H2:2019-20. Commercial vehicle sales – a lead
indicators in Q4:2019-20 and the pessimism was
indicator for road transport – continued to contract
more pronounced in the outlook for the next quarter.
in H2:2019-20 as the impact of the upward revision in
Manufacturing PMI softened to 51.8 in March from
axle norms8 in July 2018 lingered (Chart III.18a). Other
54.5 in February due to the marked decline in new
constituents of the transport segment like freight
business order (export); the COVID-19 negatively
traffic by rail, water and air improved marginally in
impacted the supply-side of the sector, with suppliers'
December-February 2019-20 (Chart III.18b).
delivery times lengthening for the first time in five
months. Services PMI moved to contraction zone: 49.3 The growth of financial, real estate and professional
in March from a seven-year high of 57.5 in February services accelerated in H2:2019-20, reflecting the
Chart III.17: Services Sector Components and Construction Indicators
a: Service Sector Component b: Construction Indicators
Sources: NSO, Office of Economic Adviser; Joint Plant Committee; Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, Ministry of Commerce & Industry; and RBI staff estimates.
7 The current round of the survey was launched on January 30, 2020 and the results are summarised from 860 responses received till March 18, 2020.
8 Ministry of Road Transport & Highways notified increase in truck axle load of heavy vehicles to raise the carrying capacity of goods vehicles by about
20-25 per cent and lower logistics costs by about 2 per cent on July 18, 2018.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.18: Performance of the Transport Sector
a: Passenger Transport Indicators b: Cargo Transport Indicators
Sources: SIAM; Airport Authority of India; Ministry of Railways; and Indian Port Association.
robust performance of information technology state governments. This has likely got accentuated in
companies in the professional services segment. Q4 in view of the tight financial position of the Centre
However, the growth of aggregate deposits and bank and States: the Union finance ministry has directed
credit remained muted (Chart III.19). all government departments and ministries to restrict
their expenditures within the budgeted level.
The growth of public administration, defence and
other services (PADO) moderated in Q3:2019-20, The residential real estate sector has continued to
reflecting subdued revenue expenditure (net of suffer from low demand and large inventory overhang.
interest payments and subsidies) of the Union and the As a result, new launches declined in Q3:2019-
20 (Chart III.20 a). Reflecting the large volume of
inventory overhang, all-India level housing prices
Chart III.19: Growth of Financial Services
have moderated somewhat (Chart III.20b).
III.3 Output Gap
The output gap – the deviation of actual output from
its potential level and expressed as a proportion to
potential output – is a summary measure of demand-
supply conditions in the economy and an important
input for monetary policy formulation, since it
provides a ‘fix’ about the position of the economy vis-à-
vis the underlying business cycle. As potential output
is unobservable, it has to be empirically estimated and
hence, it is sensitive to the choice of methodology, time
period and revisions in data. A variety of measures -
univariate filters such as the Hodrick-Prescott (HP)
Source: RBI.
filter, the Baxter-King (BK) filter and the Christiano-

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart III.20: Housing Sector – Launches, Sales and Prices
a: Housing Activity in India b: Housing Price Index of RBI
Sources: PropTiger; and RBI staff estimates.
composite estimate, by combining all these measures,
Chart III.21: Output Gap Estimates
suggests that the output gap was negative in
Q3:2019-20 (Chart III.21).
III.4 Conclusion
In Q3:2019-20, the economy hit a multi-quarter
low and going forward, the risks are tilted largely to
the downside. Private consumption, in particular,
is at serious risk from the COVID-19 pandemic,
notwithstanding improved rabi prospects and the
recent rise in food prices, and the rationalisation of
personal income tax rates in the Union Budget 2020-21
along with measures to boost rural and infrastructure
spending. Aggregate demand is expected to be impacted
adversely by likely recession in the global economy,
Note: MVKF: Multivariate Kalman Filter.
Source: RBI staff estimates. caused by disruptions in global supply chains, travel
and tourism, and lockdowns in many economies.
Fitzgerald (CF) filter and the multivariate Kalman filter Domestic production will also be impacted by the
(MVKF) taking into account inflation developments nation-wide lockdown. In the near-term, the challenge
– are used to assess the state of business cycle. The is to mitigate the adverse impact of COVID-19.

IV. Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Domestic financial markets were overwhelmingly influenced by evolving domestic and global developments and the
outbreak of COVID-19 in India in end-January 2020. Markets witnessed heightened volatility beginning February,
culminating into a state of seizure in March with sharp shrinkage in trading activity. Search for safe haven assets
and flight to safety resulted in large scale capital outflows which sent equity markets into a tailspin and exerted
sharp depreciation pressure on the Indian Rupee. The risk premium in the bond markets increased sharply amidst
increasing fears of illiquidity.
Global financial markets turned volatile during the weakened sharply with flight to safety intensifying
latter part of H2:2019-20 against the backdrop of in late February and early March.
geo-political tensions between Iran and the US and
IV.1 Domestic Financial Markets
outbreak of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic,
During H2:2019-20, domestic financial markets
the latter overwhelming the positive impact of de-
exhibited divergent movements. A policy rate cut in
escalation of trade tensions between the US and
October 2019 and liquidity management operations
China and the UK election outcome being conducive
undertaken by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
to an amicable resolution of Brexit. Towards
enthused market sentiment but growing concerns
end-February and early-March, global markets
about the domestic economic slowdown, fiscal
experienced episodic meltdowns as COVID-19
slippages, geo-political tensions and heightened
spread out of China to many countries rapidly. The
uncertainties caused by the rapid spread of COVID-19
severity of the crisis prompted emergency rate cuts
posed significant challenges, particularly towards the
by the US Federal Reserve on March 3 and March 15, close of Q4. An unscheduled meeting of the Monetary
2020. Similar moves by the central banks in Canada, Policy Committee (MPC) of the RBI on March 24, 26
the UK, Australia, New Zealand and several others and 27 delivered an unprecedented reduction in the
were backed up by measures, both conventional policy repo rate and the announcement of several
and unconventional to unfreeze markets, ensure liquidity-augmenting measures briefly assuaged
adequate liquidity and ease financial conditions. market fears (see Box IV.3).
Amidst heightened uncertainty, equity markets
In the credit market, monetary policy transmission
in many advanced economies (AEs) and emerging
was facilitated by large surplus liquidity, long term
market economies (EMEs) suffered their worst week
repo operations (LTROs) targeted to reduce banks’
after the global financial crisis (GFC) during March
cost of funds, simultaneous purchase and sale of
9-16, 2020. Bond yields fell sharply, most noticeably securities under open market operations (special
in the US where the 10-year benchmark yield fell OMOs)1 and exemption from cash reserve ratio
below 1 per cent on the days of the Fed rate cut on (CRR) requirements to incentivise lending to specific
March 03 and March 15. In currency markets, the sectors. Equity markets scaled a new high on January
US dollar appreciated in December as trade tensions 14, 2020, but turned highly volatile thereafter in sync
receded and gained further on safe haven demand with global markets. The Indian Rupee (INR) came
after the COVID-19 outbreak. Most EME currencies under pressure due to fears sparked by the spread of
1 These operations have been commonly referred to as “operation twist” by the financial media drawing on the experience of the US Federal Reserve having
conducted two such operations in 1961 and 2011 in a bid to lower long-term interest rates and provide a boost to the economy by making credit cheaper
for businesses, industries and other borrowers.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart IV.1: Policy Corridor and WACR
Source: Reserve Bank of India (RBI).
pandemic and flight to safety. In the event, however, (ii) higher levels of surplus liquidity in the second half
the depreciation of INR was significantly lower than of the year (Chart IV.2).
currencies of many EME peers.
The share of the collateralised money market
IV.1.1 Money Market (triparty repo and market repo) in the overnight
money market volume increased in H2:2019-20
Money markets have remained broadly resilient
(Chart IV.3). The dependency of banks on the call
reflecting the RBI’s proactive liquidity management
money market, however, has increased (the share of
operations. During H2, the weighted average call
call money in total overnight transactions increased
rate (WACR) in the unsecured overnight money
to 6 per cent during February-March 2020 from 4 per
market has remained within the policy corridor with
cent in January), partly reflecting the discontinuation
a downward bias (13 bps below the repo rate on an
of the daily fixed rate repo operations since February
average basis) reflecting sustained surplus liquidity
14, 2020 as part of the revised liquidity management
(Chart IV.1). The WACR spiked in the typical financial
framework announced on February 06, 2020 (see
year-end phenomenon, compounded by reduced
Box IV.2).
market participation because of the COVID-19 induced
In particular, the share of triparty repo in overnight
nation-wide lockdown.
money market volumes improved due to increased
In the overnight call money segment, the weighted lending by mutual funds (MFs) from October 2019.
average rate of traded deals continued to be higher The change in the cut-off timing3 for applicability of
than that of reported deals.2 The share of traded deals net asset value (NAV) on purchase of units in liquid
(in terms of volume) was also higher vis-a-vis reported and overnight funds has given more leeway to asset
deals, though the latter picked up in H2 vis-à-vis H1 management companies (AMCs) to deploy funds in
on: (i) increased lending by co-operative banks; and the triparty repo segment. Accordingly, the share of
2 ‘Traded deals’ are deals negotiated directly on the NDS-Call platform whereas ‘reported deals’ are over-the-counter (OTC) deals which are reported on
the NDS-Call platform after the completion of negotiation of deals.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.2: Share of Traded/Reported Deals in Call Money Market
Sources: Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL); and RBI staff estimates.
lending by MFs in triparty repo increased from 60.5 During H2:2019-20, interest rates in the collateralised
per cent in September 2019 to 64.7 per cent in October overnight money market segments softened in
and peaked at 72.1 per cent in March. Concomitantly, tandem with the WACR, though the moderation was
borrowings by MFs reduced sharply from 9.8 per more pronounced around the time of the conduct
cent in September 2019 to 2.4 per cent in October, of the third auction of the special OMOs on January
averaging only 2.2 per cent in the succeeding months. 06, 2020. Overnight rates in the triparty repo and
Chart IV.3: Share in Overnight Money Market Volumes
Sources: CCIL; and RBI staff estimates.
3 The cut-off timing for computing NAV was advanced from 2:00 PM to 1:30 PM by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) on September
20, 2019.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
market repo segments declined sharply towards end- (i) in sync with the build-up of surplus liquidity;
March 2020, with the former trading close to zero as and (ii) with the predominance of issuances by top
liquidity surplus increased in the wake of extreme rated issuers backed by relatively stronger parent
risk-aversion gripping investors, including corporates companies. The WADR, which had firmed up by
and non-banks. The triparty repo and market repo 24 bps in December 2019 reflecting credit rating
traded below the WACR (on an average) by 36 bps and concerns, increased sharply by 229 bps in March on
37 bps, respectively, in H2. Interest rates on longer- account of contagion fears arising out of (i) COVID-19
term money market instruments such as certificates induced financial stress; and (ii) interconnectedness
of deposit (CDs), commercial paper (CPs) and treasury in the banking system with distress in a private
bills (T-Bills) of 3-month maturity moved divergently, sector bank (Chart IV.5a). The share of non-banking
responding to the policy rate cut in October and the financial companies (NBFCs) in primary issuances of
build-up of surplus liquidity (Chart IV.4). CP rates CPs, which had declined immediately after the IL&FS
experienced intermittent bouts of volatility before crisis, increased in October subsequently peaking at
hardening in late-February and early-March 2020. around 35 per cent in March 2020 (Chart IV.5b).
In view of the persistent liquidity surplus, banks Monetary policy transmission was more than
reduced their recourse to CDs as fresh issuances proportionate in the triparty repo and market repo
declined to `1,86,954 crore during H2:2019-20 from segments, facilitated by large surplus liquidity
`2,01,302 crore during H1. CP issuances also declined conditions in H2:2019-20 and partly due to the year-
to `10,02,667 crore in H2 from `12,38,324 crore in end phenomenon as discussed earlier (Table IV.1).
H2:2018-19, mainly reflecting risk aversion. The The risk premium (on an average) in the money
weighted average discount rate (WADR) of CPs in market (3-month CPs over 91-day T-Bills), however,
the primary market generally eased up to February firmed up to 97 bps in H2 from 87 bps in H1, driven by
Chart IV.4: Money Market Rates
Sources: RBI; CCIL; F-TRAC, CCIL; FBIL and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.5: Primary Issuances of Commercial Paper
a. Systemic Liquidity, Issuances and WADR b. Institutional Break-up
Sources: RBI; F-TRAC, CCIL; and RBI staff estimates.
fears of illiquidity and market seizure post COVID-19 decline in the overnight index swap (OIS) rates; (ii) a
induced turbulence in global and domestic financial fall in global crude oil prices; and (iii) softening of US
markets. treasury yields. Overall, the benchmark yield declined
by 5 bps during October 2019.
IV.1.2 Government Securities (G-sec) Market
Yields firmed up by 7 bps on both the new benchmark
At the beginning of H2:2019-20, the benchmark G-sec
(6.45% GS 2029) and the old benchmark (7.26% GS
yield softened by 4 bps on (i) market expectations of
2029) as on November 5, 2019 reflecting concerns
monetary policy easing; (ii) the Centre’s decision to
about fiscal slippages, and the hardening of US
announce the auction of a new 10-year paper; and
(iii) a benign inflation trajectory. Yields, however, firmed treasury yields. At the beginning of December, both
up by 8 bps after the policy announcement on October benchmark yields increased due to market sentiment
4, 2019 as the rate cut of 25 bps fell short of market turning jittery about the Centre’s fiscal position. On
expectations. Yields continued to harden thereafter the day of the monetary policy announcement on
due to persistent worries about the Centre's finances, December 5, yields hardened by 14 bps on the new
expectation of a rise in inflation prints and subdued benchmark and by 18 bps on the old benchmark in the
appetite for government paper. They moderated wake of (i) the MPC’s decision to keep the policy rate
towards end-October, however, taking cues from (i) a unchanged in the face of upside risks to inflation; and
Table IV.1: Policy Transmission in the Money Market
(basis points)
Changes in rate
2019-20 Repo Call/Notice Triparty Repo Market Repo 3-Month CD 91-Day 3-Month
(WACR) T-Bill CP
H1: (April 02 – Sep 30) -85 -162 -111 -178 -132 -90 -59
H2: (Oct 01 – Mar 31) -100 -111 -477 -416 -94 -100 -100
Note: easing (-) / hardening (+).
Sources: RBI; CCIL; F-TRAC, CCIL; FBIL; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
(ii) foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) selling heavily 15 bps and 13 bps, respectively.4 Yields softened at the
on a pessimistic growth outlook. Market participants, long end, while firming up at the short-end, thereby
however, welcomed the Reserve Bank’s decision reducing the term premium (Box IV.1). On the whole,
to conduct special OMOs on December 19, which the new and the old benchmark yields increased by 9
resulted in new and old benchmark yields shedding bps and 15 bps, respectively, in December.
Box IV.1: Estimating Term Premium and its Determinants
The term premium is the difference in yield of a long-term
Chart IV.1.1: 10-Year G-Sec Yield Decomposition
bond vis-a-vis a short-term bond and reflects the excess
return investors demand for holding bonds of longer
maturity (Swanson, 2007). The long-term interest rates at
any maturity can be decomposed into two components: (i)
risk-neutral rate that reflects expectations of future short-
term rates; and (ii) term premium, which is indicative
of investors’ expectations relating to future central bank
policy, inflation and growth outlook, given the expected
future path of short-term interest rates.
The Adrian, Crump and Moench (ACM) approach, which
allows for the decomposition of yield into risk-neutral
component and term premium, belongs to the regular Sources: CCIL; US Fed; and RBI staff estimates.
class of dynamic term structure models (Adrian et al.,
2013). These models are premised on the no-arbitrage
across the term structure, accounting for more than
condition5. The ACM approach uses principal components
84 per cent of the fluctuations in 10-year G-Sec yields
of bond yields as pricing factors. The risk-neutral rate is
(Table IV.1.1). While term premium accounts for only
modelled as a linear function of these pricing factors. The
about 27-39 per cent of the fluctuations in short-term
longer-term yields are also obtained as linear functions
yields (1 to 2-years), around 73-61 per cent of the variation
of the pricing factors, with appropriate restrictions on
is attributed to changes in expectation on short rates. In
parameters to incorporate the assumptions of the no-
contrast, the US term premium explains a relatively higher
arbitrage, affine term-structure models. The time-varying
proportion of variation in short-term yields.
term premium is the difference between the model-fitted
yield and the risk- neutral yield.
Table IV.1.1: Share of Term Premium in
Decomposition Bond Yield Variations
(per cent)
Empirical analysis in the Indian context involves
Tenor India US
decomposition of 10-year government bond yield into
1-year 26.7 41.4
expectation and term premium components following the
2-years 38.8 45.0
ACM methodology (Dilip, 2019), based on monthly data
3-years 50.4 49.8
on 10-year G-sec yields spanning April 2009 to February
4-years 58.5 53.3
2020. This shows that the 10-year yield has broadly 5-years 64.1 55.9
tracked movements in the term premium (Chart IV.1.1). 6-years 70.2 58.1
7-years 74.7 60.1
The contribution of the term premium in G-Sec yields 8-years 78.1 61.9
9 years 81.6 63.7
approximated as 10 years 84.4 65.4
indicates that the term premium monotonically increases Source: RBI staff estimates.
(contd.)
4 Reflecting these operations, the 10-year G-sec yield softened cumulatively by 61 bps between December 19, 2019 and March 31, 2020. During the
intervening period, however, the yields fell by as much as 69 bps.
5 Two securities that provide the same future cash flow and have the same level of risk must sell for the same price.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
In order to identify the determinants of the term and India-specific policy uncertainty represented by
premium in India, the 10-year term premium is regressed Global Economic Policy Uncertainty Index (GEPU) and
on its own lag, G-Sec market depth proxied by daily Economic Policy Uncertainty (EPU) for India, respectively.
average turnover as proportion of GDP, international oil The differenced series of all the explanatory variables is
prices, the INR-USD spot exchange rate, systemic liquidity found to be stationary and the equation is estimated in
measured by outstanding balances under the liquidity an ordinary least squares (OLS) framework. Most of the
adjustment facility as proportion of GDP, and both global estimated coefficients are statistically significant with
expected signs (Table IV.1.2). The high coefficient of the
lagged term indicates persistence of the term premium.
Table IV.1.2: Determinants of Term Premium
The significance of the turnover and systemic liquidity
Variable Coefficient variables is indicative of the important role of liquidity in
Term_Premium (-1) 0.83 *** (9.60) higher demand for bonds and a consequent reduction in
ΔAverage_Turnover -5.35*** (-5.57) term premium. Movements in oil prices and the exchange
Δ(Crude_Oil_Price) 0.02***(6.65) rate of Indian Rupee (INR) also impact yields significantly
Δ(INR/USD) 0.08*** (3.33) – a spike in oil prices and a depreciation of the INR leads
Δ(Systemic_Liquidity) -0.89**(-2.14) to search for safe haven assets among investors, resulting
Δ (Global_ Uncertainty)(-1) 0.003(0.77) in flight to safety (panic selling) and increase in term
Δ(Policy_Uncertainty) 0.001(0.81) premium. Global uncertainty (lagged) and Indian policy
c 0.29* (1.76) uncertainty, although having a positive impact, are not
R-bar2 0.82 statistically significant.
Durbin Watson 1.64
References:
LB-Q (p-value) 0.59
***, **, * represent significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively Adrian, T., Crump, R. K., & Moench, E. (2013), “Pricing
Note: Figures in parentheses are t-statistics based on heteroscedasticity the term structure with linear regressions”, Journal of
and autocorrelation consistent (HAC)-corrected standard errors; LB-Q Financial Economics, 110(1), 110-138.
is p-value of Box-Pierce-Ljung Q-statistic for the null hypothesis of no
correlation up to 4 lags; and Δ is the difference operator. Dilip, A. (2019), “Term premium spillover from the US to
Average_Turnover = Daily average turnover (% of GDP), Crude_Oil_ Indian markets”, RBI Working Paper Series, WPS (DEPR):
Price = Price of Brent Crude Oil in USD/barrel, INR/USD= Spot Rupee-
05 / 2019, December.
US Dollar exchange rate, Systemic_Liquidity = Outstanding LAF balance
(% of GDP), Global_ Uncertainty = Global Economic Policy Uncertainty
Swanson, E. T. (2007), “What we do and don’t know about
Index (GEPU), Policy_Uncertainty = Economic Policy Uncertainty (EPU)
for India. the term premium”, FRBSF Economic Letter, Number
Source: RBI staff estimates. 2007-21, July.
At the beginning of January, most government After the Union Budget, the market was pleasantly
papers in the 10-14-year maturity segment gained on surprised as the government refrained from additional
expectations of open market purchases of long-term market borrowing for 2019-20, despite an upward
bonds by the Reserve Bank. Bond prices, however, fell revision in the projected fiscal deficit. Consequently,
subsequently because of lower than expected cut-off in new and old benchmark yields fell by 10 bps and 14
the special OMOs. The escalation in yields continued bps, respectively, at the beginning of February. Yields
due to rising tensions between the US and Iran and a moderated significantly on announcement of long
higher than expected inflation print in January 2020. term repo operations (LTROs) to infuse additional
Overall, the new and the old benchmark rose by 4 bps liquidity at the policy rate (Chart IV.6).6 Overall, the
and 7 bps, respectively, during January 2020.
new and the old benchmark fell by 23 bps and 26 bps,
respectively, during February 2020.
6 Since the announcement of LTRO on February 6, yields on 1-year, 3-year, 5-year and benchmark 10-year G-sec paper have come down by 62 bps, 71 bps,
31 bps and 37 bps, respectively, by end-March, 2020.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart IV.6: 10-year Generic Yield, Repo Rate and Liquidity Conditions
Sources: RBI; and Bloomberg.
In early-March, yields started with a softening bias of residents in select dated securities. Overall, the new
19 bps and 13 bps in the new and old benchmarks, benchmark fell by 23 bps in March.
respectively, due to (i) unscheduled reduction of 150
The yield curve underwent episodic shifts in H2:2019-
bps (in two phases) by the Fed in its policy rate; and (ii)
20, characterised by its level and slope (Chart IV.7a).7
fall in crude oil prices due to Saudi Arabia increasing
Since the October monetary policy announcement,
its supply. Yields, however, hardened thereafter due
the average level of the yield softened by 33 bps, while
to (i) crude prices firming up in the wake of the US
the slope became steeper by 66 bps. Since the February
pledging fiscal stimulus to arrest the pandemic; (ii) a
policy announcement (up to March 31, 2020), the
sharp depreciation of the INR triggered by COVID-19
average level of the yield softened by 24 bps even as
driven panic sales by FPIs; and (iii) fears of global
the slope steepened by 58 bps (Chart IV.7b).
recession triggering a shortfall in global dollar
FPI Investments in G-sec
liquidity. Yield on the new benchmark, however, fell
by 15 bps with announcement of OMO purchases on With inflation remaining range bound in October 2019,
March 20. The fall in yields was, however, transient foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) remained net buyers
as (i) the rupee depreciated to a new record low; and in the debt market. They turned net sellers, however,
(ii) shrinking G-sec volumes exacerbated the fall in till January 2020 on concerns about government
prices. In the backdrop of COVID-19 related stress, finances along with Moody’s downgrading of India's
the RBI announced several measures on March 27, credit rating (to "negative" from "stable”) and fears
2020. In this milieu, while the market frowned over of sovereign rating downgrade by S&P Global ratings.
the prospect of larger than expected government The lower fiscal deficit projected for 2020-21 in the
borrowings, it welcomed the Reserve Bank’s policy Union Budget buoyed sentiment and FPIs turned
announcement to remove investment limit for non- net buyers in February. With heightened turbulence
7 While the level is the average of all yields across maturities, the slope is represented by the difference in yield between the longest and the shortest
maturity (term spread).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.7: G-Sec Yield Curve
a: Shifts b. Changes in Latent Factors
Sources: Financial Benchmark India Private Ltd (FBIL); and RBI staff estimates.
in domestic markets following worldwide financial The weighted average spread of state development
market meltdown, FPIs again turned net sellers in loans (SDLs) cut-off over the corresponding G-sec yield
March (Chart IV.8). increased to 55 bps in H2 from 52 bps in H1:2019-
20 (Chart IV.10). The average inter-state spread on
Treasury Bills
securities of 10-year tenor at 7.2 bps in H2 was higher
At the shorter end of the primary segment, yields
by 3.2 bps than in H1.
on T-Bills softened during H2:2019-20, tracking the
Switching of Securities
benchmark paper and even traded lower than the
reverse repo rate in certain maturities due to surplus During H2:2019-20, the Reserve Bank conducted seven
liquidity in the banking system (Chart IV.9). switch operations amounting to `1,24,694 crore for
Chart IV.8: FPI Investment in Equity and Debt
Source: National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL).

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart IV.9: FBIL -T-Bill Benchmark
(Yield to Maturity)
Source: FBIL.
active debt consolidation. This partly contributed to Cash Balance of the Central Government
the weighted average maturity (WAM) of outstanding
At the beginning of H2:2019-20, the Government
stock of G-secs increasing to 10.54 years as on March
31, 2020 from 10.02 years as on September 30, 2019. started with a negative cash balance and continued to
As on March 31, 2020, the weighted average coupon avail ways and means advances/overdraft (WMA/OD)
(WAC) at 7.69 per cent was lower than 7.77 per cent at intermittently up to end-March. Cash management
end-September 2019. bills (CMBs) were issued seven times during
Chart IV.10: SDLs - Amount Raised and the Spread
Source: RBI.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
H2:2019-20 with maturities between 42-84 days8 for State Bank of India’s and ICICI Bank’s 5-year credit
a cumulative amount of `2,50,000 crore or 104.2 per default swap (CDS) spreads increased by 174 bps and
cent of the revised estimate of `2,40,000 crore of 163 bps, respectively, during H2: 2019-20.
CMBs for 2019-20.
Resource mobilisation through issuances of corporate
IV.1.3 Corporate Bond Market bonds in the primary market at `3.1 lakh crore during
October 2019-February 2020 was higher by 3.0 per
Corporate bond yields eased during H2:2019-20,
cent than `3.0 lakh crore during the corresponding
largely tracking G-sec yields and reflecting surplus
period of the previous year (Chart IV.11b). Almost
systemic liquidity conditions (Chart IV.11a). The AAA
the entire resource mobilisation in the corporate
5-year corporate bond yields softened by 42 bps –
bond market (97.9 per cent) was through the private
from 7.44 per cent at end-September 2019 to 7.02 per
placement route. In order to provide an alternative
cent at end-March 2020. Overall, AAA 5-year yields
moderated by 108 bps during 2019-20, reflecting source of financing for public sector entities at lower
the transmission of monetary policy actions to the cost and help deepen bond markets by diversifying
corporate bond market and the impact of special the investor base with increased retail participation,
OMOs and LTRO auctions during December 2019 - the Government of India (GoI) launched the Bharat
March 2020. The risk premia on bonds (5-year AAA Bond Exchange Traded Fund (ETF) in December 2019
corporate bonds over 5-year G-sec) issued by public – the first ETF for corporate bonds in India – which
sector undertakings (PSUs), financial institutions (FIs) mobilised `12,395 crore. Investments by FPIs in
and banks reduced by 26 bps while those issued by corporate bonds declined by 14.8 per cent – from `2.03
NBFCs reduced by 14 bps. In contrast, the risk premia lakh crore at end-September 2019 to `1.73 lakh crore
on bonds issued by corporates increased by 5 bps. at end-March 2020. Consequently, FPIs’ utilisation of
Reflecting the stress in the banking sector from a major the approved limit for investment in corporate bonds
private sector bank and declaration of the pandemic, declined to 54.5 per cent at end-March 2020 from 66.9
Chart IV.11: Corporate Bonds
a: Spread and Yields b. Changes in Latent Factors
Sources: Bloomberg; and SEBI.
8 The maturities of the CMBs were designed to alleviate the liquidity tightness caused by advance tax outflows in the second half of March 2020.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart IV.12: Tightening Financial Conditions - Spread over Repo Rate
Sources: RBI; and Bloomberg.
per cent at end-September 2019. The average daily IV.1.4 Equity Market
turnover in the corporate bond market increased to
The Indian equity market, which made sizable gains
`8,460 crore during H2:2019-20 (up to March 6, 2020)
till mid-January 2020, recorded a sharp decline
from `7,097 crore during the corresponding period of in the remaining part of H2:2019-20 tracking the
H2:2018-19. deterioration in global equity market sentiment due
to COVID-19. The BSE Sensex touched the 40,000 level
Following the declaration of COVID-19 as a pandemic
during Q3:2019-20 but it came under intense pressure
on March 11, global financial markets were gripped
during Q4: 2019-20. Overall, the Sensex declined by
by bearish sentiments. Heightened global turbulence
23.8 per cent during H2:2019-20 (Chart IV.13a).
resulted in a significant tightening of financial
conditions in India since March 11, 2020 (Chart IV.12). The BSE Sensex reclaimed the 40,000 level on October
30, 2019 taking positive cues from global markets
While the spread of secondary market 3-month CP
amidst fresh optimism over the US-China trade
rates of NBFCs over the policy repo rate increased by
negotiations and agreement on Brexit deal between
108 bps during the period March 11-31, that of AAA
the UK and the European Union (EU). The uptrend
corporate bonds of 1-year, 3-year and 5-year maturity
continued in November and December on the back
increased by 77, 99 and 119 bps, respectively. The
of growth boosting measures by the Government of
spread of the benchmark 10-year G-sec over the
India (GoI), support to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
policy repo rate also firmed up by 76 bps during the
Code amendment and approval for a partial credit
same period. The worsening of financial conditions
guarantee scheme for public sector banks to purchase
is attributed to both external and domestic factors.
pooled assets from NBFCs. Furthermore, positive
While the upheaval in global markets sparked off
global signals emanating from the US Fed’s dovish
panic sales by FPIs in search of safe haven assets, MFs
outlook, the US-China phase one trade deal and Brexit
liquidated their positions to create a liquidity buffer in favouring UK election outcome also brightened market
anticipation of redemption pressures from investors. sentiment.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.13: Stock Market Indices and Investment
a: BSE Sensex and Dow Jones Industrial Average b: Net Investment in Equity by Institutional Investors
Sources: Bloomberg; NSDL; and SEBI.
The buoyancy in the equity market continued till (8.2 per cent) on March 12, 2020. Market sentiment
mid-January 2020 against the backdrop of a fall in worsened the following day as market fell over 10
global crude prices, recovery in industrial output in per cent during early hours of trading, attracting
November, higher GST collection and expansion in circuit breakers and suspension of trading for 45
manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) minutes. This was followed by a statement from SEBI
in December which pushed the Sensex to a record indicating that the fall in the Indian stock indices had
close of 41953 on January 14, 2020. Markets wilted, been significantly lower than in many other countries
however, following the escalation of geo-political and assuring market participants of suitable and
tensions between the US and Iran, a subdued appropriate actions, if required. Market rebounded,
domestic GDP growth outlook along with downward ending the day with a net gain of 1325 points (4.0
revision of India’s growth forecast for 2019-20 by the per cent), the largest ever recovery in a single day.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). Subsequently, however, bearish momentum returned
due to (i) sharp moderation in global crude prices;
The decline got accentuated on February 1, 2020 with
(ii) reports of a spike in COVID-19 cases in India; (iii)
the Sensex plunging by 988 points (2.4 per cent) as
strain on the banking sector caused by the distress of
proposals in the Union Budget 2020-21 fell short of
a private sector bank; and (iv) growing worries about
market expectations. A V-shaped recovery, however,
global recession. Consequently, the Indian equity
was witnessed on the back of a sharp fall in crude oil
market breached the lower circuit for the second time
prices, release of robust PMI data for January 2020
during March 2020 with the BSE Sensex recording its
and announcement of credit and liquidity enhancing
biggest fall of 3,935 points (13.2 per cent) on March 23,
measures on February 6, 2020. Subsequently, Indian
2020. Markets recovered thereafter amid expectations
equity markets retracted in line with global markets
of fiscal measures by the government after the
reacting to COVID-19.
announcement of extension of regulatory deadlines
Growing risk aversion across the world triggered heavy and relaxation of norms for corporates and taxpayers.
sell-offs in equity markets, including in India, during Subsequently, expectations of more fiscal stimulus
March 2020. The BSE Sensex fell by 2919 points buoyed market sentiment. Notwithstanding the

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
announcement of comprehensive liquidity measures EME currencies, including the INR, weakened sharply
by the Reserve Bank including sizeable reduction in in March, with the latter depreciating to a low of
policy rates, the BSE Sensex fell marginally on March `76.15 on March 24, 2020. While the INR depreciated
27. Overall, the BSE Sensex registered a sharp decline by 6.2 per cent vis-à-vis the US dollar during H2:2019-
of 23.0 per cent during March 2020. 20 (end-March 2020 over end-September 2019), the
decline was modest in comparison with many EME
During H2, while MFs were net buyers to the tune of
peers such as the Thai baht, the Argentine peso, the
` 38,989 crore (up to March 30), FPIs were net sellers
Indonesian rupiah, the Turkish lira, the South African
at `5,599 crore in the Indian equity market (Chart
rand, the Mexican peso, the Russian ruble, and the
IV.13b). FPIs, in particular, sold heavily with net sales
Brazilian real (Chart IV.14a).
amounting to `62,433 crore in March 2020.
In terms of the 36-currency nominal effective exchange
In the primary segment of the equity market,
rate (NEER), the INR depreciated by 2.9 per cent (as at
resource mobilisation through public issues of equity
end-March 2020 over average of September 2019). The
(initial public offers and right issues) remained
INR also depreciated by 1.3 per cent in terms of the
muted at `6,176 crore during October 2019-February
36-currency real effective exchange rate (REER) during
2020 (although higher than `3,429 crore in the
the same period (Table IV.2).
corresponding period of the previous year).
Between September 2019 and February 2020, the
IV.1.5 Foreign Exchange Market
appreciation of the INR in terms of the REER was
The INR remained volatile during H2:2019-20 due modest as compared with those of the Russian ruble,
to multiple factors referred to in preceding sections the Indonesian rupiah, the Philippine peso, the
and the high volatility in equity markets. Portfolio Chinese yuan, the Mexican peso, and the Argentine
investment was severely impacted. Consequently, peso (Chart IV.14b).
Chart IV.14: Cross-Currency Movements
a: Movement of Major EME Currencies against US Dollar b: Movement in REER
(end-March 2020 over end-September 2019) (February 2020 over September 2019)
Sources: RBI; FBIL; IMF; Bloomberg; Thomson Reuters; and Bank for International Settlements (BIS).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
The slowdown in credit growth was spread across all
Table IV.2: Nominal and Real Effective Exchange
Rates – Trade-based Weights bank groups, especially private sector banks. Credit
(Base: 2004-05 = 100) growth of public sector and foreign banks remained
Item Index: Appreciation (+) / modest, even as there has been some uptick in
end-March 2020 (P) Depreciation (-) (Per cent)
credit by public sector banks in the recent period
end-March 2020 over
(Chart IV.16). Of the incremental credit extended by
September (average) 2019
scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) during the year
36-currency REER 114.6 -1.3
36-currency NEER 71.1 -2.9
6-currency REER 120.3 -4.5
6-currency NEER 60.3 -5.5 Chart IV.16: Bank Group-wise Credit Growth
`/ US$ 75.4 -5.4
P: Provisional.
Sources: RBI; and FBIL.
IV.1.6 Credit Market
Credit offtake during 2019-20 (up to March 13, 2020)
was muted with non-food credit growth at 6.1 per
cent being less than half the growth of 14.4 per cent
in the corresponding period of the previous year.
Both low momentum and unfavourable base effects
were at work (Chart IV.15). The seasonal decline in Q3
credit growth in 2019-20 was more pronounced than
a year ago, while the offtake during Q4:2019-20 (up
to March 13) has been subdued as compared with the
Source: RBI.
corresponding quarters of previous two years.
Chart IV.15: Non-food Credit Growth of SCBs (Monthly Average)
Source: RBI.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart IV.17: Sectoral Deployment of Credit
a. Growth Rate b:Sectoral Share in Credit Flow
Source: RBI.
(March 15, 2019 to March 13, 2020), 62.6 per cent was segment, credit offtake has been mainly concentrated
provided by private sector banks, 36.6 per cent by in housing and credit card outstandings. Within
public sector banks and 0.8 per cent by foreign banks. industry, credit growth to beverage and tobacco
accelerated, but credit flows to chemical and chemical
While growth (y-o-y) of personal loans accelerated
products, cement and cement products, construction
marginally to 17.0 per cent in February 2020 from
and infrastructure decelerated. Credit to basic metal
16.7 per cent in February 2019, credit growth to both
and metal products, textiles, food processing and all
agriculture and industry moderated over the last
engineering contracted in February 2020.
five months. Although credit growth to the services
sector showed an uptick in January 2020, it again Even as the overall non-performing assets (NPA)
weakened in February 2020 (Chart IV.17a). Credit ratio of SCBs remained unchanged in December 2019
offtake in personal loans segment accounted for the from end-March 2019 (Chart IV.18a), the NPA ratio in
largest share (Chart IV.17b). Within the personal loan respect of industry dipped (Chart IV.18b).
Chart IV.18: Stressed Assets and Non-Performing Assets
a. Overall Loan Portfolio of SCBs b. Sectoral Non-Performing Assets
Source: RBI.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.19: Non-SLR Investment and Adjusted Non-Food Credit
a: Non-SLR Investment b: Adjusted Non-Food Credit
(*up to Mar 13, 2020) (Quarterly Variation)
Source: RBI.
Banks’ investments in CPs, bonds, debentures and portfolios. Banks held excess SLR of 8.4 per cent of net
shares of public and private corporates – reflected in demand and time liabilities (NDTL) on Feb 28, 2020
non-SLR investment – were lower during H2:2019-20 as compared with 6.3 per cent of NDTL at end-March
(up to March 13) than a year ago mainly due to lower 2019 (Chart IV.20).
investment in bonds/shares and debentures (Chart
IV.2 Monetary Policy Transmission
IV.19a). As a result, adjusted non-food credit growth
was lower in Q4:2019-20 (up to March 13) than in Q3
Since the October 2019 Monetary Policy Report,
(Chart IV.19b).
monetary policy transmission to banks’ term deposit
With credit offtake remaining muted and non-SLR and lending interest rates has improved (Table IV.3).
investments declining, banks augmented their SLR The pass-through of the policy rate cut to the weighted
Chart IV.20: Excess SLR of Banks
Note: Excess SLR is the average of all SLR maintained on reporting Fridays in a quarter,
Source: RBI.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Table IV.3: Transmission to Deposit and Chart IV.21: Transmission Across Bank Groups
Lending Rates during Easing Cycle: February 2019 -
(Basis points)
February 2020
Period Repo Term Deposit Lending
Rate Rates Rates
Median WADTDR 1-year WALR - WALR -
Term Median Out- Fresh
Deposit MCLR standing Rupee
Rate Rupee Loans
Loans
February- -110 -9 -7 -30 2 -40
September

October -100 -29 -39 -30 -18 -31
2019-
March 2020*
February -210 -48 -46 -60 -16 -71
2019-
March 2020*
*: Latest data on WALR and WADTDR pertain to February 2020.
WADTDR: Weighted Average Domestic Term Deposit Rate. WALR: Source: RBI.
Weighted Average Lending Rate.
MCLR: Marginal Cost of Funds-based Lending Rate.
During February 2019 - February 2020, the WALR on
Source: RBI.
fresh rupee loans declined across bank groups, with
average domestic term deposit rate (WADTDR) on
the largest decline observed in the case of foreign
outstanding rupee deposits improved to 39 bps during
banks, followed by public sector banks (Chart IV.21).
October 2019-February 2020 from a mere 7 bps during
the previous eight months (February-September The median spread10 [WALR on fresh rupee loans over
2019), resulting in an overall reduction of 46 bps. The 1-year median marginal cost of funds-based lending
weighted average lending rate (WALR) on outstanding rate (MCLR)] charged by private sector banks was
rupee loans has also declined by 18 bps since October higher than that of public sector banks, reflecting,
2019 in contrast to a rise of 2 bps during February- inter alia, differences in the lending portfolio (Chart
September 2019. The WALR on fresh rupee loans IV.22). Sector-specific WALRs in respect of sectors such
declined by 71 bps (February 2019-February 2020). as micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs),
Of this, a decline of 31 bps occurred during October credit card and other personal loans were higher than
2019-February 2020. the overall WALR for both public and private sector
banks. The share of loans to each of these sectors in
The improvement in transmission during H2:2019-20
total loans sanctioned by private sector banks was
to banks’ deposit and lending interest rates reflected
higher than that of public sector banks.
the lagged impact of the previous rate cuts (110
bps during February–September 2019) as also the The share of public sector banks in fresh rupee loans
introduction of the external benchmark system from sanctioned by scheduled commercial banks was
October 1, 2019 for the pricing of new floating rate comparable to that of private sector banks during
loans to select sectors, viz., retail loans and loans to April-August 2019, even though public sector banks
micro and small enterprises (MSEs).9 account for a significantly larger share in outstanding
9 Effective April 1, 2020, loans to medium enterprises have also been linked to an external benchmark.
10 Median spread of a bank group is arrived at from the spread (difference between WALR on fresh rupee loans and 1-year MCLR) of each bank within the
group.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.22: Median Spread - WALR (Fresh loans) Chart IV.23: Bank Group-wise Share of Fresh
over 1-Year MCLR Rupee Loans
Source: RBI. Source: RBI.
credit. In comparison with private sector banks, Spreads, i.e., WALR on outstanding rupee loans
non-performing assets of public sector banks have over 1-year MCLR charged by scheduled commercial
been higher and the capital to risk weighted assets banks, were lowest in respect of housing loans,
ratio (CRAR) lower. Despite this, the share of public reflecting lower probability of default and availability
sector banks in total fresh rupee loans sanctioned of collateral, as also competition from NBFCs
by scheduled commercial banks increased to 52.8 (Chart IV.24). Personal loans – other than housing,
per cent from a low of 39.7 per cent in August 2019 vehicles and education – are mostly unsecured and
(Chart IV.23). involve higher credit risk; hence, the spread charged
was the highest for ‘other personal loans’.
Chart IV.24: Sector-wise WALR (Outstanding Rupee Loans)
Relative to 1-year Median MCLR- February 2020
Source: RBI.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart IV.25: Spreads - Lending Rates over Corporate Bond Yields
Sources: Bloomberg; and RBI.
The spreads between lending rates in the credit their loans to various other benchmarks published by
market and corporate bond yields have risen sharply Financial Benchmarks India Private Ltd (FBIL) such
since January 2019, implying faster transmission as CD rate, overnight index swap (OIS) rate, Mumbai
of policy rate cuts to the corporate bond market as Interbank Outright Rate (MIBOR) and 3-month T-Bill
against relatively muted transmission to the credit rate. Eleven banks have linked different sectors to
market (Chart IV.25). different benchmarks.
Following the introduction of the external benchmark The median spread in respect of fresh rupee loans
system in the banking sector on October 1, 2019, 36 linked to the policy repo rate (i.e., median WALR over
banks – out of 62 banks from whom information the repo rate) was the highest for ‘other personal loans’
was collected – adopted the policy repo rate as the (Table IV.5). Among the bank-groups, the median
external benchmark for floating rate loans to the retail spread charged by public sector banks for different
categories of loans was lower than that charged by
and MSE sectors (Table IV.4). Six banks have linked
private sector banks.
Table IV.4: External Benchmarks of Commercial
Banks: February 2020 Table IV.5: Loans Linked to the Policy Repo Rate -
Median Spread (February 2020)
Bank Group Policy CD OIS MIBOR 3-Month Sector-
Repo Rate Rate T-Bill specific (Percentage points)
Rate Rate Benchmark Bank Group Personal Loan Micro
and Small
Public Sector Banks 14 - - - - 1 Housing Vehicle Education Other
Enterprises
(15) Personal
Private Banks (20) 15 1 - - 4 Loans
Foreign Banks (27)@ 7 - 1 1 3 6 Public Sector 3.3 4.6 4.2 6.7 5.8
Commercial banks 36 1 1 1 3 11 Banks (15)
(62) @ Private Sector 5.3 6.2 6.8 7.1 6.4
Banks (20)
@ 9 banks do not have any exposure to retail loans and MSE loans Domestic 4.0 4.9 4.6 6.8 6.1
segments. Banks (35)
Note: Figures in parentheses refer to the number of banks.
Source: RBI. Source: RBI.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
There are early indications of an improvement in
Chart IV.26: WALR on Personal Loans and
transmission to fresh rupee loans sanctioned in Loans to MSMEs – Variation
respect of sectors where new floating rate loans (October 2019 – February 2020)
have been linked to the external benchmark. During
October 2019 - February 2020, the WALRs of domestic
(public and private sector) banks declined in respect of
fresh rupee loans sanctioned for housing loans by 34
bps, vehicle loans by 73 bps, education loans by 21 bps
and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) by
6 bps (Chart IV.26).
Administered interest rates on small saving schemes
set by the Government of India have implications for
monetary transmission. These administered interest
rates are linked to market yields on G-secs with a
lag and are fixed on a quarterly basis at a spread
Source: RBI.
ranging from 0-100 bps over and above G-sec yields
of comparable maturities. On March 31, 2020, the
Government of India sharply reduced rates of interest Q1:2020-21 are broadly aligned with the prescribed
on all small saving schemes (except saving deposit) in formula based administered interest rates on small
the range of 70-140 bps for Q1:2020-21. Following the savings (Table IV.6). This augurs well for monetary
revision, interest rates on small saving schemes for transmission, going forward.
Table IV.6: Interest Rates on Small Saving Instruments - Q1:2020-21
Small Savings Scheme Maturity Spread Average G-sec Formula based Government Difference between
(years) (Percentage yield (%) of Rate of Interest Announced Rate Government
point) $ Corresponding (%) of Interest (%) Announced Rate and
Maturity (Applicable for (Q1:2020-21) the Formula-based
(December 2019 to Q1: 2020-21) Rate (basis points)
February 2020)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (3) + (4) (6) (7) = (6)-(5)
Savings Deposit - - - - 4.00 -
Public Provident Fund 15 0.25 6.88 7.13 7.10 -3
Term Deposits
1 Year 1 0 5.15 5.15 5.50 35
2 Year 2 0 5.47 5.47 5.50 3
3 Year 3 0 5.78 5.78 5.50 -28
5 Year 5 0.25 6.41 6.66 6.70 4
Post Office Recurring Deposit Account 5 0 5.78 5.78 5.80 2
Post Office Monthly Income Scheme 5 0.25 6.38 6.63 6.60 -3
Kisan Vikas Patra 124 Months 0 6.88 6.88 6.90 2
NSC VIII issue 5 0.25 6.57 6.82 6.80 -2
Senior Citizens Saving Scheme 5 1.00 6.41 7.41 7.40 -1
Sukanya Samriddhi Account Scheme 21 0.75 6.88 7.63 7.60 -3
$: Spreads for fixing small saving rates as per Government of India Press Release of February 16, 2016.
Note: Compounding frequency varies across instruments.
Sources: Government of India; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
IV.3. Liquidity Management and the Operating operations by the RBI were conducted in line with the
Procedure of Monetary Policy revised liquidity management framework announced
on February 6, 2020 and guided by the need to ease
The RBI Act, 1934 amended in 2016 requires the
liquidity constraints in the banking system and
RBI to place the operating procedure relating to the
financial markets on account of COVID-19 related
implementation of monetary policy and changes
stress (Box IV.2). During H1 and a major part of
thereto from time to time, if any, in the public
H2:2019-20, systemic liquidity increased mainly on
domain. During H2:2019-20, liquidity management
Box IV.2: Revised Liquidity Management Framework
As announced in the Statement on Developmental and (v) Instruments of liquidity management continue to
Regulatory Policies of June 6, 2019, an Internal Working include fixed and variable rate repo/reverse repo
Group was set up to review the liquidity management auctions, outright open market operations (OMOs),
framework with a view to simplifying it and suggesting forex swaps and other instruments as may be
measures to clearly communicate the objectives and the deployed from time to time to ensure that the system
toolkit for liquidity management. The Group’s report was has adequate liquidity at all times.
placed on the Reserve Bank’s website on September 26,
(vi) A 14-day term repo/reverse repo operation at a
2019 for comments from stakeholders and members of the
variable rate and conducted to coincide with the cash
public (RBI, 2019). Based on the feedback received, it was
reserve ratio (CRR) maintenance cycle is the main
decided to fine-tune the erstwhile liquidity management
liquidity management tool for managing frictional
framework. The key elements of the revised framework
liquidity requirements.
are set out below:
(i) Liquidity management remains the operating (vii) The main liquidity operation would be supported
procedure of monetary policy; the weighted average by fine-tuning operations, overnight and/or longer
call rate (WACR) continues to be its operating target. tenor, to tide over any unanticipated liquidity
changes during the reserve maintenance period.
(ii) The liquidity management corridor is retained, with
the marginal standing facility (MSF) rate as its upper (viii) In addition, the RBI will conduct, if needed, longer-
bound (ceiling) and the fixed rate reverse repo rate as term variable rate repo/reverse repo operations of
the lower bound (floor), with the policy repo rate in more than 14 days.
the middle of the corridor.
(ix) The current requirement of maintaining a minimum
(iii) The width of the corridor is retained at 50 basis
of 90 per cent of the prescribed CRR on a daily basis
points – the reverse repo rate being 25 basis points
will continue.12
below the repo rate and the MSF rate 25 basis points
(x) Standalone Primary Dealers (SPDs) were allowed
above the repo rate.11
to participate directly in all overnight liquidity
(iv) The daily fixed rate repo and four 14-day term
management operations.
repos conducted every fortnight earlier, have been
withdrawn. The Reserve Bank, however, would (xi) The margin requirements under the Liquidity
ensure adequate provision/absorption of liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) would be reviewed on a
as warranted by underlying and evolving market periodic basis; the margin requirement for reverse
conditions – unrestricted by quantitative ceilings – at repo transactions, however, would continue to be
or around the policy rate. ‘Nil’.
11 The corridor width was asymmetrically widened on March 27, 2020 (see Box IV.3 for details).
12 The requirement of minimum daily CRR balance was reduced to 80 per cent on March 27, 2020 (see Box IV.3 for details).
(contd.)

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
(xii) In order to improve communication on the RBI’s liquidity conditions of the banking system on a
liquidity management framework and procedures, fortnightly basis with a lag of one fortnight; and (c)
periodic consultations will be conducted with market
the following measures were introduced: (a) the
participants and other stakeholders.
Press Release detailing Money Market Operations
(MMO) was modified suitably to show both the daily Reference:
flow impact as well as the stock impact of the RBI’s Reserve Bank of India (2019), “Report of the Internal
liquidity operations; (b) the Reserve Bank started Working Group to Review the Liquidity Management
publishing a quantitative assessment of durable Framework”, September 26.
account of (i) the Reserve Bank’s forex operations; In view of the COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse
and (ii) higher spending by the government, impact on global and domestic financial markets, the
including recourse to WMA and OD. In order MPC advanced its meeting in an unprecedented move,
to mop up the increasing surplus liquidity, the after a careful evaluation of the current and evolving
Reserve Bank conducted variable rate reverse repo macroeconomic and financial conditions, and the
auctions of various tenors (ranging from overnight outlook. The MPC voted for an unprecedented 75 bps
to 63 days including the main 14-day term reverse reduction in the policy repo rate and for continuing
repo auction conducted on reporting Fridays since
with the accommodative stance as long as necessary
February 14, 2020) amounting to `1,96,02,726 crore
to revive growth and mitigate the impact of COVID-19
in H2. Moreover, five LTROs were conducted during
on the economy, while ensuring that inflation remains
February and March with a view to ensuring monetary
within the target. Alongside, several measures were
transmission. Furthermore, one targeted long term
also announced on March 27, 2020 to address the
repo operation (TLTRO) was conducted in March to
stress in financial conditions and ease COVID-19
address the COVID-19 induced pressure on financial
related liquidity constraints (Box IV.3).
conditions.
Box IV.3: Liquidity Measures to Combat Adverse Impact of COVID-19
(I) Targeted Long-Term Repo Operations (TLTROs) (ii) The minimum daily CRR balance requirement was
reduced from 90 per cent to 80 per cent effective
Reserve Bank to conduct auctions of targeted long-term
from the first day of the fortnight beginning March
repos of up to three years tenor of appropriate sizes for
28, 2020. This dispensation will be available up to
a total amount of up to `1,00,000 crore at a floating rate
June 26, 2020.
linked to the policy repo rate. Liquidity availed by banks
under TLTROs should be deployed in investment grade (III) Marginal Standing Facility (MSF)
corporate bonds, commercial paper, and non-convertible
In view of the exceptionally high volatility in domestic
debentures over and above the outstanding level of their
financial markets and to provide comfort to the banking
investments in these bonds as on March 27, 2020.
system, banks’ limit for borrowing overnight under
(II) Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)
the MSF by dipping into their Statutory Liquidity Ratio
(i) CRR requirement of banks was reduced by 100 bps (SLR) was raised to 3 per cent of NDTL from 2 per cent.
from 4.0 per cent of NDTL to 3.0 per cent effective This measure will allow the banking system to avail an
fortnight beginning March 28, 2020, which would additional `1,37,000 crore of liquidity under the liquidity
augment primary liquidity in the banking system adjustment facility (LAF) window at the reduced MSF
by about `1,37,000 crore. This dispensation will be rate of 4.65 per cent and will be applicable up to June
available for a period of one year ending March 26, 30, 2020.
2021.
(contd.)

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
(IV) Reduction in Policy Rate and Widening of the Policy cent. The purpose of this measure was to make it
Corridor relatively unattractive for banks to passively deposit
funds with the RBI; instead, these funds should be
(i) The policy repo rate under the LAF was reduced by 75
deployed for on-lending to productive sectors of the
basis points to 4.40 per cent from 5.15 per cent with
economy.
immediate effect. Accordingly, the MSF rate and the
Bank Rate were reduced to 4.65 per cent from 5.40 (iii) Thus, the reverse repo rate is now 40 bps lower than
the policy repo rate while the MSF rate continues to
per cent.
be 25 bps above the policy repo rate.
(ii) In view of persistent excess liquidity, the existing
Reference:
LAF corridor was widened asymmetrically to 65 bps
from 50 bps. Accordingly, the reverse repo rate was Reserve Bank of India (2020), “Statement on Developmental
reduced by 90 bps from 4.90 per cent to 4.00 per and Regulatory Policies”, March 27.
Drivers and Management of Liquidity than 11.0 per cent during the corresponding period of
2018-19.
The leakage of currency from the system during
H2:2019-20 was more than offset by Reserve Bank’s Surplus liquidity conditions persisted in Q3:2019-
forex operations and drawdown of government cash 20 as daily net liquidity absorption under the LAF
balances, thereby augmenting liquidity in the banking progressively increased from `1.99 lakh crore in
system (Chart IV.27). The surplus liquidity was October to `2.41 lakh crore in November and further
absorbed through reverse repo operations under the to `2.61 lakh crore in December 2019. Expecting the
LAF. The increase in currency in circulation (CiC) of continuance of surplus liquidity, the Reserve Bank
`2.61 lakh crore in H2 was more than five-fold than conducted four longer term reverse repo auctions
that of `49,378 crore in H1:2019-20 and higher than in November – two of 21-days and one each of 42-
`2.11 lakh crore in H2:2018-19. As a result, growth days and 35-days tenor – thereby absorbing `78,934
in CiC at 11.9 per cent during H2:2019-20 was higher crore. During Q3, the Reserve Bank’s forex operations
Chart IV.27 : Drivers and Management of Liquidity
Source: RBI.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
(`1.25 lakh crore) and drawdown of GoI cash balances USD 2.71 billion (Chart IV.28). Furthermore, in view
(`45,184 crore) augmented systemic liquidity. The of hardening yields and widening spreads in certain
Reserve Bank also conducted four special OMOs market segments symptomatic of stressed financial
during December and January (December 23 and 30, conditions (see Chart IV.12), three open market
2019 and January 6 and 23, 2020), which augmented purchase operations were conducted on March 20,
net banking system liquidity by `11,724 crore.13 24 and 26, 2020, thereby injecting `40,000 crore
cumulatively.
In Q4, average daily surplus liquidity further increased
to `3.18 lakh crore in January as the Government With a view to reinforcing monetary transmission
continued to avail WMA/OD for the entire month, and augmenting credit flows to productive sectors,
but moderated to `2.98 lakh crore in February as the Reserve Bank conducted five long term repo
GoI’s cash balance turned positive in the second half operations (LTRO) at fixed repo rate (one of one-year
of the month, due to issuance of CMBs as discussed and four of three-year tenors) between February 17
earlier (see IV.1.2 for details). In March, average daily and March 18, 2020, which infused durable liquidity
net absorption under the LAF amounted to `3.02 amounting to `1.25 lakh crore into the system with
lakh crore. Taking into consideration the increased additional `75,000 crore in the pipeline. The LTROs
demand for US dollars amidst flight to safety triggered provided banks with durable liquidity at reasonable
by extremely volatile global financial markets, the cost (fixed repo rate) relative to prevailing market
Reserve Bank conducted two 6-month US Dollar/INR rates. Moreover, a TLTRO auction of 3-year maturity
sell/buy swap auction on March 16 and March 23, held on March 27, 2020 also augmented durable
2020, which cumulatively provided dollar liquidity of liquidity by `25,009 crore.14 Thus, total durable
Chart IV.28: Liquidity Management
Source: RBI.
13 While long-term paper amounting to `40,000 crore was purchased through these auctions, sale of short-term securities amounted to `28,276 crore.
14 Two more TLTRO auctions of 3-year maturity were conducted on April 3 and April 9, respectively, which cumulatively augmented durable liquidity by
`50,032 crore.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Summing up, currency expansion, Reserve Bank’s
Chart IV.29: Durable Liquidity
forex operations and government spending were the
Injections during 2019-20
key liquidity drivers in the banking system during
H2:2019-20 (Chart IV.30).
Given surplus liquidity conditions, fine-tuning
operations through variable rate reverse repo
auctions with maturity ranging from overnight to 3
days were extensively used for absorbing liquidity
till February 14, 2020. As a pre-emptive measure to
tide over any frictional liquidity requirements caused
by dislocations due to COVID-19, two fine-tuning
variable rate repo auctions of 16-day maturity were
conducted on March 23 and March 24, 2020 injecting
`77,745 crore cumulatively (Table IV.7). To address any
additional demand for liquidity and provide flexibility
Source: RBI.
to the banking system in its liquidity management
towards the year-end, one fine-tuning variable rate
liquidity (including forex purchases, OMOs, LTROs repo auction of 12-days maturity was conducted on
and TLTRO) amounting to `4,49,326 crore was injected March 26 injecting `11,772 crore.15 As a special case,
in H2:2019-20 as compared with `1,26,514 crore in H1 SPDs were allowed to participate in these auctions
(Chart IV.29). along with other eligible participants.
Chart IV.30: Net LAF and Forex Purchases during 2019-20
Source: RBI.
15 Two other fine-tuning operations through variable rate repo auctions were held – for ` 25,000 crore each of 7-days and 3-days maturity on March 13 and
March 31, respectively – which did not elicit any response from the market.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Table IV.7: Fine-tuning Operations through Variable Rate Auctions in H2:2019-20
Repo Reverse Repo
Maturity in Days 12, 16 1-3 4 21 28-29 31 35 42 63
Number of Operations 3 90 2 2 3 1 1 2 3
Total Volume (` crore) 89,517 1,85,67,948 3,21,328 28,923 47,165 12,790 25,004 30,507 65,033
Average Volume (` crore) 29,839 2,06,311 1,60,664 14,462 15,722 12,790 25,004 15,254 21,678
Source: RBI.
IV.4 Conclusion getting reflected in bond market yields. Credit
growth is likely to remain modest, reflecting weak
Domestic financial markets remain vulnerable to
demand and risk aversion. Going forward, liquidity
global developments, deepening of the growth
conditions would be managed under the revised
slowdown in India and rising concerns about
liquidity management framework, consistent with
COVID-19. Despite the weak domestic growth
outlook, Indian equity markets scaled new highs, the accommodative stance of monetary policy as
before turning highly volatile in early-March in long as necessary to revive growth and mitigate the
tandem with global equity markets. The outlook is impact of COVID-19, while ensuring that inflation
characterised by heightened uncertainty with capital remains within the target. Better transmission of
outflows continuing and exerting pressures on the monetary policy impulses to the credit market would
INR. This outlook is uncertain and is increasingly remain a priority.

V. External Environment
Economic activity remained subdued across major advanced economies (AEs) and emerging market economies
(EMEs). Though some transitory signs of stabilisation were evident in early 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 and
its rapid spread over a large number of countries has clouded the near-term outlook. Monetary policy has remained
highly accommodative as most central banks across the world resorted to massive easing through both conventional
and unconventional measures. Global financial markets, which remained buoyant on risk-on sentiments in Q4:2019,
slumped on sell-off pressures triggered by intensifying COVID-19 disruptions.
Global economic activity remained subdued during to 6.6 million in the week ended March 28, 2020,
the major part of H2:2019. In January 2020, the IMF the highest since the series began in 1967. Crude oil
estimated global GDP growth at 2.9 per cent for 2019, prices plummeted in March due to price war between
the lowest since the global financial crisis (GFC). Early Saudi Arabia and Russia over disagreement on
into 2020, signs of stabilisation seemed to appear in production cuts. Prices of other global commodities
the form of de-escalating trade tensions between the ebbed on fears of weakening global demand. Prices of
US and China and receding possibility of a hard Brexit. precious metals initially rallied on safe haven demand
A pneumonia of unknown cause detected in Wuhan, as investors resorted to flight to safety, but they
China first reported to the World Health Organization
declined in the second week of March as investors
(WHO) on December 31, 2019 delivered a cataclysmic
preferred to hold cash. Central banks across major
shock to these green shoots and changed the world.
advanced economies (AEs) and emerging market
The WHO declared a Public Health Emergency of
economies (EMEs) switched to highly accommodative
International Concern on January 30, 2020 and
mode, with most of them resorting to rate cuts in
christened the novel coronavirus as COVID-19 on
unscheduled meetings. Central banks also announced
February 11, 2020. On March 11, 2020, the WHO
several liquidity measures and regulatory relaxations
declared it a pandemic – “the first pandemic caused
in the face of tightening financial conditions. Fiscal
by a corona virus”1. At the time of going to press, more
authorities across the world have launched stimuli
than 12 lakh people were infected around the world
in the range of 0.8-16.0 per cent of their GDP. Besides
with more than 67,000 deaths2. In the G-20 Ministerial
direct support, measures also include tax deferment
Call on the Coronavirus Emergency on March 23, 2020
and credit guarantee.
the Managing Director, IMF formally informed that
the global economy had entered into recession in V.1 Global Economic Conditions
2020.
In the US, GDP grew by 2.1 per cent in Q4:2019 – the
Amongst the early incoming data, GDP of Singapore same pace as in the previous quarter. Overall GDP
shrank by 10.6 per cent in Q1:2020. In the US, jobless growth for 2019 decelerated to its slowest pace in
claims surged to a peak as the number of people three years amidst continuing weakness in business
filling for unemployment insurance claims jumped investment and exports (Table V.1). In Q1:2020,
1 Opening remarks of WHO Director-General, Media Briefing, March 11, 2020.
2 World Health Organization.

Chapter V External Environment
In Q1:2020, the rapid spread of COVID-19 infections
Table V.1: Real GDP Growth (q-o-q, annualised)
in Italy, Spain and other European countries is likely
(Per cent)
to impact manufacturing and services sectors. The
Country Q4- Q1- Q2- Q3- Q4- 2020 2021
2018 2019 2019 2019 2019 (P) (P) ECB has projected GDP growth to decline to 0.8 per
Advanced Economies cent for 2020 under its baseline scenario assumption
Canada 1.0 1.0 3.4 1.1 0.3 1.8 1.8 that the impact of virus would get contained in next
Euro area 1.2 1.6 0.8 1.2 0.4 1.3 1.4
few months and growth would normalise in H2:2020.
Japan 2.4 2.2 2.3 0.1 -7.1 0.7 0.5
South Korea 3.6 -1.6 4.0 1.6 5.2 2.2 2.7 The Japanese economy contracted sharply in Q4 as
UK 0.8 2.4 -0.4 2.0 0.0 1.4 1.5
private consumption slumped in the wake of October’s
US 1.1 3.1 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.0 1.7
sales tax hike. The slowdown in factory activity
Emerging Market Economies
due to a string of typhoons and sluggish external
Brazil 0.0 0.0 2.0 2.4 2.0 2.2 2.3
China* 6.5 6.4 6.2 6.0 6.0 6.0 5.8 demand added further pressure on domestic activity.
Indonesia* 5.2 5.1 5.1 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.1 In Q1:2020, the increased number of infections,
Russia* 2.7 0.5 0.9 1.7 2.1 1.9 2.0
including across the East Asian regions, threaten to
South Africa 1.4 -3.2 3.3 -0.8 -1.4 0.8 1.0
Thailand 5.2 3.2 1.4 0.6 1.0 3.0 3.5 disrupt economic activity severely.
Memo: 2019 (E) 2020 (P) 2021 (P)
In the UK, GDP growth stagnated in Q4, after
World 2.9 3.3 3.4 rebounding in Q3. Positive contributions from the
Output
World Trade 1.0 2.9 3.7 services and construction sectors were offset by a
Volume
decline in manufacturing output. Political uncertainty
E: Estimate P: Projection *: y-o-y growth
due to the Brexit deadline in October and general
Sources: Bloomberg; and International Monetary Fund.
election in December appeared to have slowed activity
industrial production growth stalled in February after
in the final quarter. In Q1:2020, industrial production
contracting for the fifth consecutive month in January
contracted and retail sales remained subdued. Risks
and the manufacturing purchasing managers’ index
emanating from COVID-19 may undermine the
(PMI) of the Institute for Supply Management (ISM)
outlook for Q1.
contracted in March after improving marginally in
January-February. Retail sales have also softened since Sluggish growth across major EMEs in Q4:2019 was
January. Although labour market remained strong in overwhelmed by the outbreak of COVID-19; suddenly,
February as reflected in better than expected US jobs the downside risks to growth became acute (Box V.1).
report, number of people filling jobless claims in the
The Chinese economy had managed to maintain the
US for the week ended March 28 rose to a record level
pace of GDP growth in Q4:2019 at the momentum
of 6.6 million – the highest since the series began in
secured in Q3 only to be overtaken in Q1:2020 by
1967.
COVID-19. Caixin’s manufacturing PMI plunged to
Economic activity in the Euro area decelerated 40.3 in February – the lowest since the survey began
markedly in Q4:2019 as a pronounced downturn in in April 2004 – with new orders and employment
industrial activity and subdued consumer demand falling the most on enforced shutdowns in many
weighed on overall economic performance. GDP regions. However, it rebounded in March to 50.1
growth contracted in France and Italy in Q4:2019 suggesting slight expansion in manufacturing activity
on waning consumer confidence, and stagnated in as output improved marginally relative to February’s
Germany on muted private and government spending. disruptions. Industrial production contracted sharply

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Box V.1: Impact of COVID-19 on Global Growth
In the initial weeks of February, most forecasts of global
Chart V.1.2: Multilateral Institutions' Estimate of
output loss due to COVID-19 were in terms of the outbreak
Impact on Global Growth in 2020 due to COVID-19
being confined to China and being brought under control
by March/June. It was, however, acknowledged that even
in the limited scenario, the economic impact would be
significant as China is a much larger player – both in
terms of economic size and its role in global value chains
– now than in 2003, the period of the SARS epidemic
(Chart V.1.1).
Owing to extended lunar new year holidays as also
government-imposed factory shutdowns and travel
restrictions in a number of regions, China’s manufacturing/
services activity declined sharply in February. In the latter Notes: 1. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
estimates of March considered baseline scenario of COVID-19 peaking in
part of February, a rapid surge of infections and fatalities China in Q1:2020 and limited spread to other regions. Extreme scenario
around the world began to surface, even as the spread of considered a longer-lasting and more intensive COVID-19 outbreak spreading
to most regions. The estimated impact is in terms of percentage point of
the virus in China began to plateau. Lockdowns were/have global GDP growth.
been imposed in most countries. Travel bans have created 2. World Bank estimates of April considered baseline scenario of a global
pandemic and extreme scenario of extreme global pandemic. The estimated
distress for airlines, tourism and hospitality industries.
impact is in terms of per cent deviation from the benchmark from Envisage
model.
In the commodity and financial markets, crude oil
3. Asian Development Bank (ADB) estimates of April considered baseline
prices have been on a downward spiral; with West Texas scenario of shorter containment and smaller demand shocks; and an extreme
scenario of longer containment and larger demand shocks. The estimated
intermediate (WTI) crude prices crashing below US$ 20 per
impact is in terms of per cent of GDP.
barrel on March 30, 2020. Equity markets have suffered Sources: OECD; World Bank; and ADB.
Chart V.1.1: China in the Global Economy major losses, while gold, fixed income assets – mainly
government debt, and the US dollar gained ground due
to safe haven demand, but later corrected significantly on
profit-booking and flight to cash (refer to Chart V.4, and
Charts V.6-8).
With the pandemic still looming, the estimates of the
downward drag on global growth are being continuously
revised. The consensus, however, is that there will be a
recession in 2020 (Chart V.1.2).
Multilateral institutions, governments and central banks
are taking swift action to tackle the pandemic and its
Sources: World Bank; IMF; WTO; and RBI staff estimates.
consequences (Table V.1.1.)
Table V.1.1: Key Measures3 by Select Central Banks in Response to COVID-19 Outbreak
Central Bank Measures
People’s • 1.7 trillion yuan of liquidity injected on February 3 and 4
Bank of • Rate on 200 billion yuan worth of one-year medium-term lending facility loans to financial institutions lowered by 10 bps to 3.15
China per cent on February 17
• 1-year Loan Prime Rate lowered by 10 bps to 4.05 per cent effective February 20, 2020; 5-year LPR lowered by 5 bps to 4.75 per cent
• Reduction in reserve requirement ratio for select banks
• 7-day reverse repo rate lowered by 20 bps to 2.2 per cent on March 30
(contd.)
3 Up to March 31, 2020.

Chapter V External Environment
Central Bank Measures
Federal • Target range of the federal funds rate lowered by 50 bps on March 3 and a further 100 bps on March 16 to 0-0.25 per cent
Reserve • Unlimited asset purchases, commercial mortgage-backed securities included in the asset purchase programme
• Lowering of primary credit rate to 0.25 per cent
• Banks allowed to use capital and liquidity buffers for lending
• Reserve requirement reduced to 0 per cent from March 26
• Additional repo operations
• Primary Dealer Credit Facility established
• Commercial Paper Funding Facility established
• Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility established
• Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility established
• Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility and the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility established to support credit to large
employers
• The existing dollar liquidity swap line arrangements with five central banks (EU, UK, Japan, Canada and Switzerland) made lower
cost, with more frequent and longer-term operations
• Temporary swap lines with central banks of Australia, Brazil, Denmark, South Korea, Mexico, Norway, New Zealand, Singapore and
Sweden established
• Temporary repurchase agreement facility for foreign and international monetary authorities (FIMA Repo Facility) established to help
support the smooth functioning of financial markets, including the US Treasury market
European • Additional longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) to provide immediate liquidity support to the euro area financial system till
Central Bank June 2020
• More favourable terms under TLTRO III from June 2020 to June 2021, to support bank lending to those affected most by the spread
of COVID-19
• Additional net asset purchases of €120 billion until end 2020
• Banks allowed to use capital and liquidity buffers, including Pillar 2 Guidance
• €750 billion Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme (PEPP) to be conducted until end-2020 in a flexible manner, to include
purchase of Greek government debt
• Non-financial commercial paper included in asset purchases
• Collateral standards eased for ECB’s refinancing operations
Bank of • Bank Rate reduced in two steps of 50 bps and 15 bps to all-time low of 0.1 per cent on March 19
England • Additional purchases of £200 billion to be done in 2020
• A new Term Funding Scheme with additional incentives for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises introduced
• Counter-cyclical capital buffer rate reduced to 0 per cent of banks’ exposures to UK borrowers effective March 11.
• Supervisory guidance on dividends and other distributions issued
• Other supervisory and prudential policy measures including cancellation of annual stress test of banks in 2020
• Covid Corporate Financing Facility launched, in association with the Government
• Contingent Term Repo Facility activated
Bank of • Provide loans against corporate debt as collateral at 0 per cent with maturity up to one year
Japan • Additional 2 trillion yen purchases of commercial paper and corporate bonds
• Double the annual pace of purchases of exchange traded funds and J-REITs
Bank of • Base Rate lowered by 50 bps to 0.75 per cent on March 17
Korea • Interest rate on the Bank Intermediated Lending Support Facility reduced to 0.25 per cent and the ceiling on the facility increased
by 5 trillion won
• Collateral for open market operations broadened
• Unlimited liquidity through weekly 91-day repo auctions
• Forex market stability rules eased
Bank • Policy rate lowered by 25 bps each in February and March to 4.5 per cent effective March 19, 2020
Indonesia • Daily repo auctions of 12-month tenor introduced
• Frequency of forex swap auctions increased
• Triple intervention policy intensified to minimize the risk of increasing rupiah exchange rate volatility
• Forex reserve requirement for commercial banks halved to 4 per cent effective March 16, 2020
• Rupiah reserve requirement lowered by 50 bps for banks financing export-import activity, MSMEs and other priority sectors effective
April 1, 2020
• Range of underlying transactions available to foreign investors expanded to provide alternative hedging instruments against rupiah
holdings

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Central Bank Measures
Reserve Bank • Cash rate target reduced in two steps of 25 bps each to a further all-time low of 0.25 per cent with effect from March 20
of Australia • Target set for the yield on 3-year government bonds of around 0.25 per cent, to be achieved through secondary market purchases
• Term funding facility for the banking system, with particular support for credit to small and medium-sized businesses instituted
• Exchange settlement balances to be remunerated at 10 bps
Bank of • Reduced key rate in three steps of 50 bps each to 0.25 per cent in March
Canada • Announced purchase of government securities, minimum purchase of $5 billion per week
• Bankers’ Acceptance Purchase Facility launched
• Provincial Money Market Purchase announced
• Standing Term Liquidity Facility established
• Commercial Paper Purchase Program launched
Sources: Websites of central banks; and www.centralbanking.com
The key existential question is: Will the worldwide effort contain the mortality and morbidity as also the macroeconomic
consequences of COVID-19?
References:
Asian Development Bank (2020), Asian Development Outlook 2020, April.
IMF (2020), https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2020/03/23/pr2098-imf-managing-director-statement-following-a-g20-
ministerial-call-on-the-coronavirus-emergency.
OECD (2020), “Coronavirus: The World Economy at Risk”, Interim Economic Assessment, March 2.
World Bank (2020), “East Asia and Pacific in the Time of COVID-19”, East Asia and Pacific Economic Update, April.
to its lowest level in 30 years and retail sales registered Saudi Arabia poses a large downside risk. The Brazilian
its first ever decline in January-February 2020. economy ended the year on a relatively weak note due
The imposition of shipping restrictions and order to a fall in construction and mining activity and private
cancellations as part of virus containment measures consumption. During Q1:2020, incoming data point
weighed heavily on exports and supply chains. Wide- to a slowdown in both industrial production and retail
ranging policy support – both fiscal and monetary and sales, while deteriorating external sector dynamics on
health services – is expected to mitigate the slowdown increasing COVID-19 uncertainty is further expected
in the second half of 2020. to pull down the growth, going ahead. The South
African economy entered a technical recession in Q4
Among the other BRICS countries, economic activity
– second time in two years – as agriculture, transport
in Russia was sustained in H2:2019 as reflected in
and construction activities declined sharply amidst
improved retail sales, tight labour markets and falling
frequent power outages. Moreover, falling export
inflation. Increased government spending on national
growth due to supply constraints, and weak fixed
projects and lower interest rates appeared to have
investment and government spending added further
supported activity in Q4:2019. Incoming data for
downward pressures.
Q1:2020 suggest that the economy has maintained
the pace so far as retail sales have been increasing In Indonesia, economic activity maintained
since January, while industrial production improved momentum: GDP growth in Q4:2019 was at the same
in February after a moderation in January. However, a pace as in Q3. Positive contribution from the external
sharp fall in crude oil prices due to the tensions with sector due to falling imports was offset by weak fixed

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.1: Survey Indicators
a: Composite PMI b: OECD Leading Indicators
Sources: Bloomberg; and OECD.
investment and household consumption. While OECD economies, composite leading indicators (CLIs)
strong infrastructure spending and accommodative – available till December – suggested a firming up of
monetary policy are expected to provide a boost to growth momentum across major AEs and EMEs in the
economic activity, downside risks emerging from the final months of 2019 (Chart V.1b).
pandemic may impact the momentum, going ahead.
The slowdown in global trade got entrenched in
In Thailand, GDP growth in Q4 registered a five-year
H2:2019 as the mild recovery in trade volume of
low in y-o-y terms, pulled down by weak domestic and
AEs during Q3:2019 turned out to be short-lived,
external demand, delay in the government budget and
with contraction setting in again in Q4:2019. EMEs
drought. The growth outlook for Q1 remains bleak as
dragged down global trade in all four quarters of 2019
tourism is adversely impacted by COVID-19. (Chart V.2a).
The global composite PMI plunged in February- Forward-looking indicators suggest that world trade
March, reversing the uptrend that occurred between growth is likely to remain weak in Q1:2020 due to
October 2019 and January 2020. The index reached supply and demand disruptions caused by COVID-19.
a ten-month high in January as output, new orders The WTO’s Goods Trade Barometer remained below
and employment rose faster on the back of strong trend, pulled down by contraction in constituent
business optimism. However, it fell sharply since indices pertaining to agricultural raw materials and
February, even falling to 133-month low level of container shipping. The Baltic Dry Index, which
39.4 in March, as both manufacturing and services measures the shipping costs for a wide variety of
activity declined considerably amidst disruptions bulk commodities such as coal, iron ore and grain,
caused by COVID-19 (Chart V.1a). Among the major continues to show weakness (Chart V.2b).

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart V.2: World Trade Volume
a: World Trade Volume - Relative Contribution b: World Trade Volume and Baltic Index
Sources: CPB Netherlands; and Bloomberg.
V.2 Commodity Prices and Inflation prices, led by demand contractions amidst COVID-19
pandemic (Chart V.3a).
Global commodity prices remained largely supported
in Q4:2019 as uncertainty related to trade eased and Crude oil prices remained largely supported in
the US dollar weakened. However, global headwinds Q4:2019 on extended production cuts by OPEC plus
relating to US-Iran conflict in early January followed before tumbling towards the end of January. A spike
by the outbreak of COVID-19 exerted downward to US$ 69 per barrel on January 6, 2020 followed
pressures. The Bloomberg commodity price index escalation of US-Iran tensions, but a correction ensued
declined by 20.5 per cent between October 2019 and as tensions eased. From end-January, oil prices came
March 2020. under intense downward pressure on fears of demand
slowdown caused by COVID-19, plummeting by almost
On the contrary, the food price index of the Food and
30 per cent on March 9, 2020. Increased supplies by
Agriculture Organisation (FAO) increased by 1.8 per
Saudi Arabia following failure to strike an agreement
cent between October 2019 and March 2020. Global
on production cuts with Russia, sparked fears of price
food prices firmed up beginning October 2019 to a
war (Chart V.3b). On March 30, 2020, WTI crude prices
five-year high in December and continued to firm up
slid below US$ 20 per barrel as COVID-19 widened its
in January 2020 on the back of rising vegetable oil,
vice-like grip on the world.
sugar and dairy products prices amidst robust demand
and expectations of tightening world supplies. The Base metal prices, measured by Bloomberg’s base metal
food price index slid in February on a sharp fall in the index, fell by 17.9 per cent between October 2019
price of vegetable oil, which subsequently softened and March 2020 largely due to a demand slowdown.
on excess supply from Malaysia and fear of global The firming of these prices during October-December
demand slowdown. Sugar and dairy prices have risen on optimism over signing of the phase one trade
on tightening of export supplies from major producers deal between the US and China gave way to bearish
and robust demand. In March, the index fell further, sentiments from mid-January 2020. The spiralling of
primarily on sharp fall in vegetable oil and sugar infected cases beyond Chinese borders and concerns

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.3: Commodity Prices
a: FAO Food Price Indices b: Energy and Crude Oil Prices
Sources: Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO); and World Bank.
about the global downturn intensified deflationary Inflation remained broadly contained in major AEs,
pressures pushing metal prices down (Chart V.4). but picked up in key EMEs on firming food prices. In
the US, CPI inflation picked up modestly beginning
Gold prices remained elevated in January-February,
October on rising prices of health services and food,
with prices rallying on safe haven demand amidst
though eased marginally in February on falling travel
increased concerns over the global growth outlook
(Box V.2). From mid-March, however, gold prices and fuel prices amidst COVID-19 disruptions. In
declined, falling below the US$ 1500 per troy ounce terms of changes in the core personal consumption
mark, on large sell-offs as investors fled to cash to expenditure (PCE) deflator – the Fed’s preferred
compensate losses in other markets amidst heightened measure – inflation remained below the Fed’s 2 per
volatility. cent target. In the Euro area too, inflation remained
Chart V.4: Metal Price Indices
Source: Bloomberg.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Box V.2: What Drives Gold Prices?
As a financial asset, gold’s appeal typically rises in times against price risks of other financial instruments, and as
of financial turmoil. Recently, growing concerns about a a safe haven in times of economic and financial turmoil
deep global slowdown due to COVID-19 boosted its safe (Levin et al., 2006; Buar and Lucey, 2010; Emmrich and
haven demand. On year to date basis, gold prices shot up McGroarty, 2013; and Bilgin et al., 2018).
by 11 per cent (till March 09, 2020) on top of an 18 per cent
The dynamics of gold prices are examined on a Johansen’s
increase in 2019 (Chart V.2.1a). Gold futures also traded
cointegration framework to estimate the long-run
higher (Chart V.2. 1b). Through 2019, risk-off sentiments relationship. Gold prices (LGOLD), the US general price
kept the overall appetite for gold strong as also evident index (LCPIUS) and the US real exchange rate (LREERUS)
in high exchange traded fund inflows, large purchases by are of one order of integration or I(1) and hence a long-run
central banks and increased COMEX net long positions. relationship between them could exist, as borne out by
This upside to gold prices extended into 2020 up to mid- tests for cointegration. The estimated long-run equation
March as extreme risk aversion caused by COVID-19 is as follows:
sparked off sustained gold sales as it too lost allure amid
...(1)
heightened volatility, and gave way to an overriding
Equation (1) is augmented with the error correction term
preference to hold cash. This pulled down gold prices by
to capture the short-run dynamics of gold prices, while
12 per cent between March 9 and 19, 2020. However, with
controlling for exogenous factors, viz., global economic
subsequent recovery towards the end of March 2020, gold
policy uncertainty (EPU) index4, flight to safety proxied
prices increased by 3.9 per cent on year to date basis (up
by changes in the Standard and Poor’s Index of US equity
to March 31, 2020).
markets (ΔLS&P) and changes in Brent spot prices (ΔLOIL).
The empirical literature identifies a host of factors, viz., oil The empirical analysis used monthly data for the period
prices, global liquidity conditions, exchange rate, inflation, spanning January 2005 to December 2019. All the data,
bond yields, stock prices and economic policy uncertainty barring LCPIUS, were sourced from Bloomberg. LCPIUS
as major drivers of gold prices. Investors consider gold as was sourced from the website of the Federal Reserve of
a tool for portfolio diversification, as it enables hedges St. Louis.
Chart V.2.1: Gold Price Movement
a: Gold Spot Prices b: Gold Futures
Sources: Bloomberg; and The World Bank.
(contd.)
4 Davis, Steven J. (2016), “An Index of Global Economic Policy Uncertainty,” Macroeconomic Review, October.

Chapter V External Environment
The short-run equation was estimated by adjusting in the short-run, which implies that a higher inflation in
for ARCH effects, since the errors were found to be the US could dampen the demand for gold and reduce its
heteroscedastic. Time dummies (October 2008 and May price. This could be attributed to a host of factors, viz.,
2006) representing the periods of excessive intra-month central bank policies, investors’ preference to hold cash
volatility in gold prices were included (Table V.1.1). ahead of a recession and uncertainty perturbing the long-
The error correction term turned out to be statistically run relationship. The other variables, viz., economic and
significant with the correct negative sign. This indicates political uncertainty, stock index and crude oil prices had
the return of the gold price to its long-run relationship their expected signs and were statistically significant.
and that the estimated model is stable. ΔLREERUS was
In sum, the empirical findings suggest that a rise in crude
found to be significant at one lag with a negative sign. This
oil prices and a depreciation of the US dollar in the short-
suggests that a depreciation in the US dollar would make
run lead to increase in gold prices. On the other hand,
gold cheaper outside the US dollar area leading to higher
gold prices fall with a rise in equity prices. Gold prices
demand for gold and increase in gold prices in US dollar
also move in tandem with heightened economic policy
terms. ΔLCPIUS has negative relationship with gold prices
uncertainty, thereby indicating the safe haven feature of
the asset.
Table V.1.1: Short-run Estimates of Change in Gold Prices
References:
Coefficient P-values
ECM -0.071 0.00 Baur, D. G. and B. M. Lucey (2010), “Is Gold a Hedge or a
Safe Haven? An Analysis of Stocks, Bonds and Gold”, The
-0.090 0.512 Financial Review, 45, 2, pp. 217–229.
Bilgin, M. H., G. Gozgor, C. K. Lau and X. Sheng
-3.13 0.004 (2018), “The Effects of Uncertainty Measures on the Price
of Gold”, International Review of Financial Analysis, 58,
pp.1-7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irfa.2018.03.009
-1.217 0.001
Emmrich, O. and F. McGroarty (2013), “Should Gold be
0.124 0.001
Included in Institutional Investment Portfolios? Applied
-0.222 0.014
Financial Economics, 23, pp. 1553–1565.
EPU 0.022 0.000
Notes: 1. Diagnostic tests based on correlogram of standardised residuals Levin, E. J., A. Montagnoli and R. E. Wright (2006), “Short-
suggest no autocorrelation in residuals. run and Long-run Determinants of the Price of Gold”,
2. Correlogram of the standardised residual squares suggest no residual
World Gold Council, Research Study No 32.
heteroscedasticity.
http://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/7215/1/
3. ARCH LM test p-value: 0.116
Source: RBI staff estimates. strathprints007215.pdf.
below target. Although energy and food inflation got accentuated in January due to seasonal demand
firmed up, measures of underlying inflation remained during the lunar new-year holiday. However, inflation
generally muted. Moreover, CPI inflation eased further moderated slightly in February on easing non-food
in March on sharp decline in energy prices. In Japan, prices. In Brazil, CPI inflation has been rising since
CPI inflation remained at a low level and edged down November on the back of strong gains in food prices,
further in February on soft food prices and declining
especially meat and transport prices, although falling
fuel prices (Chart V.5a).
food and beverages prices provided some relief in
Inflation edged up across major EMEs, except February. In South Africa, inflation increased for the
Russia. China experienced persisting inflationary third consecutive month in February, primarily driven
pressures on account of surging pork prices, which by a rise in prices of food, non-alcoholic beverages

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart V.5: CPI Inflation (y-o-y) – Select Economies
a: Advanced Economies b: Emerging Market Economies
Source: Bloomberg.
and health services. CPI inflation eased in Russia, needed to support smooth market functioning and
falling below the 4 per cent target from October 2019. effective transmission of monetary policy, including
Subdued external demand, falling food prices amidst commercial mortgage-backed securities in its purchase
excess supply and strong base effect related to the programme, lowering of the interest rate on primary
VAT rate hike a year ago exacerbated the downtrend. credit to the same level as the top of the target range
However, it increased marginally in March on firming of the Federal Funds rate, allowing banks to use
services and non-food prices (Chart V.5b). capital and liquidity buffers for lending, and reducing
the reserve requirement to zero. The Fed has also
V.3 Monetary Policy Stance
launched dedicated facilities for financing support to
In 2019, monetary policy was said5 to have been the commercial paper, primary dealers and money market
most accommodative across the world since the GFC. mutual funds, while reviving the Term Asset-Backed
Most AEs as also some EMEs, kept their policy rate Securities Loan Facility from the crisis time. The Fed
on hold in Q4:2019, but resorted to massive easing would also be supporting credit to large employers,
through both conventional and unconventional under new programmes. Besides, the Fed has also
measures with the outbreak and rapid spread of expanded dollar liquidity swap lines with other
COVID-19 in Q1:2020. central banks and set up a temporary repo facility for
foreign and international monetary authorities.
The US Fed, which had paused in two consecutive
FOMC meetings in December 2019 and January 2020, The European Central Bank (ECB), has not changed
resorted to emergency rate cuts – 50 bps on March key rates since a 10 bps reduction in deposit rate
3 and 100 bps on March 15 (Chart V.6a). With these announced in its September 2019 meeting. In its
sharp reductions, the Fed brought down the target March 2020 meeting, however, the ECB announced
range for the Federal Funds rate to the same level an additional 120 billion of net asset purchases,
as during the GFC. The Fed has also announced temporary longer-term refinancing operations and
several other measures such as asset purchases more favourable terms and quantum for the targeted
5 See https://blogs.imf.org/2020/01/28/a-call-for-vigilance-after-a-strong-year- for-risky-assets/. Also https://www.ft.com/content/b8709ca4-e8f8-11e9-85f4-
d00e5018f061.

Chapter V External Environment
longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO) III for one balances of banks. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand
year from June 2020. The ECB also announced a new undertook an emergency rate cut of 75 bps in March,
750 billion Pandemic Emergency Purchase pushing the policy rate to a new low of 0.25 per cent,
Programme (PEPP) under which private and public besides announcing purchases under open market
sector securities would be purchased until end- operations and other measures to support smooth
2020 with flexibility on purchase flows over time, functioning of the market.
and across asset classes and jurisdictions, including
The Bank of Korea, on a pause since November 2019,
Greek government bonds. The ECB also included
undertook an emergency rate cut of 50 bps in March
non-financial commercial paper as eligible assets for
2020 and announced other measures to stabilise
its corporate sector purchase programme, and eased
economic and financial conditions.
collateral requirements for its refinancing operations.
Riksbank was one of the few central banks that raised
The Bank of England (BoE), which was on a pause
policy rates in 2019 with a hike of 25 bps in December
after raising the Bank rate in August 2018, undertook
2019, thereby moving out of negative policy rate
two out-of-turn rate cuts in March – of 50 bps and 15
territory. In an emergency monetary policy meeting in
bps – thereby reducing the Bank rate to an all-time low
March, however, the Riksbank announced additional
of 0.1 per cent. The BoE also announced additional
asset purchases of SEK 300 billion, besides offering
asset purchases of £200 billion to be completed
increased funding to banks on favourable terms and
quickly in 2020. The BoE also announced macro-
other measures.
prudential relaxations and other incentives in order to
EMEs have also undertaken monetary easing and
support the economy with funds to tackle COVID-19
announced other liquidity support measures. The
repercussions.
People’s Bank of China (PBoC) had effected a 5 bps cut
The Bank of Canada (BoC), which was on a pause after in the one-year Loan Prime Rate (LPR) in November
October 2018, cut its policy rate by a cumulative 150 and followed it up with another 10 bps reduction in
bps in March 2020, in three steps of 50 bps each to 0.25 February 2020. The PBoC also injected about 1.2 trillion
per cent, to provide support to the Canadian financial Chinese yuan of liquidity when markets opened on
system and the economy during the COVID-19 February 3 after an extended lunar new year break. It
pandemic. The BoC has also introduced new liquidity also announced a low-cost refinancing facility aimed
support measures, including launching a quantitative at small and medium sized enterprises. In March, the
easing programme. PBoC lowered the reserve ratios for certain categories
of banks and lowered the 7-day reverse repo rate by
The Bank of Japan announced an enhancement of
20 bps.
monetary easing in March 2020. The Reserve Bank
of Australia (RBA), which was on a pause from Other BRICS central banks remained in accommodative
November 2019 after having reduced the cash rate mode. The central bank of Brazil, which has been
to an all-time low in October, reduced the cash following ‘stimulative monetary policy’ and reducing
rate by 25 bps each on two occasions in March to a the Selic rate since August 2019, cut this rate further
new low of 0.25 per cent. The RBA also undertook by 50 bps each on two occasions in Q4:2019, and
additional measures such as yield curve control to followed up with a 25 bps cut in February and a 50
be achieved through bond purchases, term funding bps cut in March. The Bank has also offered regulatory
facility and remuneration of exchange settlement relaxations and other liquidity support facilities. The

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart V.6: Policy Rate Changes – Select Major Economies
a: Advanced Economies b: Emerging Market Economies
Note: The policy rate changes are mapped to the time when the decision was announced and not when it took effect.
Source: Bloomberg.
Bank of Russia, which had been reducing its policy V.4 Global Financial Markets
rate in every policy meeting since June 2019, cut it
Global financial markets witnessed firming up of risk-
by 25 bps each in its October, December and February
on sentiment in Q4:2019 as a host of factors that had
meetings, but maintained a pause in the March
kept markets on edge – notably, the US-China trade
meeting. The South African Reserve Bank, which had
tensions; and uncertainty regarding Brexit – receded
cut policy rate in July 2019 and had since maintained
to an extent. There was a bout of risk-off sentiment
a pause, reduced its repo rate by 25 bps in January
in early January due to geopolitical tensions
2020 and a further 100 bps in March 2020 as the South
emanating from the US-Iran conflict. However,
African economy was expected to contract in 2020,
calm quickly returned but when China declared
having entered a recession in H2:2019 while inflation
on January 20 that there had been cases of human
remained moderate (Chart V.6b).
to human transmission of the novel coronavirus,
The central bank of Turkey, which embarked on policy sentiments turned extremely volatile, exacerbated by
accommodation in July 2019, cumulatively cut the disagreement on oil production cuts between OPEC
policy rate by 675 bps on five occasions since October and Russia in March. In the same week, the WHO
2019. Banco de México, which cut its policy rate by 25 categorised the COVID-19 as a pandemic, which led
bps in each of its meeting since August 2019 as growth to a tailspin in the markets and financing conditions
stagnated for several quarters, effected a 50 bps cut tightened worldwide.
in March. The central bank of Philippines and Bank Among AEs, US equities were on a continuous uptrend
Indonesia, which were on pause after cutting rates in Q4:2019, as the US Fed cut rates in October while
in September, cut their policy rates by 25 bps each in the unemployment level in the US remained at a
February 2020, and by 50 bps and 25 bps, respectively, historic low. Positive news on the trade front – passing
in March to support growth. Other central banks that of the US-Mexico-Canada agreement by the House of
cut rates on COVID-19 concerns include, inter alia, the Representatives and the announcement of the phase
Bank of Thailand, the Bank Negara Malaysia and the one agreement between the US and China – buoyed
Central Bank of Chile. markets. In January, escalation of tension with Iran

Chapter V External Environment
pulled down equities for a brief period. Another slide with favourable currency movement even as overall
occurred after the outbreak of COVID-19. As China growth remained sluggish. With the COVID-19
took strong action to restrict the limit and impact of outbreak, however, their indices crashed in sync with
COVID-19, US equities began rising again, reaching all- stock markets worldwide.
time highs in the third week of February. Immediately
Stock markets in EMEs mirrored this pattern.
thereafter, with the rapid spread of COVID-19 to Italy,
Driven by risk-on sentiments, stock markets in
South Korea and Iran, sentiments worsened and the
most EMEs registered handsome gains in Q4:2019
US indices registered their worst weekly performance
(Chart V.7). In Q1:2020, EME stock markets have been
since the GFC. The US Fed issued a statement that it
driven mainly by concerns about COVID-19, with
stood ready to support the economy and announced
additional headwinds arising from the crude oil price
an out-of-turn rate cut, which led to a recovery in the
war in March. Chinese stocks fell most on February
market for a couple of days. After the fallout between
3 after an extended lunar break. Other EME markets
Russia and Saudi Arabia on crude oil and COVID-19
suffered sharper slides with frequent trading curbs in
being declared a pandemic, the US equity market hit
the second week of March.
circuit breakers on two days in one week (March 9 and
12) – March 12 was the worst trading day since the Bond yields firmed up across major AEs in the wake
Black Monday crash of October 19, 1987. The markets of risk-on sentiments, as also on improving global
hit a circuit breaker again on March 16, just after the growth outlook and receding trade tensions in
second emergency rate cut by the Fed. The marginal Q4:2019. With COVID-19, yields dipped on strong
recovery in the latter part of March was on account of safe haven demand. In the US, the 10-year yield fell
economic stimulus package worth about US$ 2 trillion to historic lows in the fourth week of February as
being signed into law.
stock markets fell and demand for government bonds
In the UK and the Euro area, equity markets gained soared exemplifying flight to quality with the rapid
strength from December onwards with the UK general spread of COVID-19 outside China and the US Centers
elections and certainty about Brexit. In Japan, stocks for Disease Control and Prevention warning of
rose in Q4:2019 on expectation of higher profitability increased risk to US residents. Yields dived below one
Chart V.7: Equity Markets
a:Equity Indices (MSCI) b: Change in Equity Indices
Sources: Bloomberg; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report April 2020
Chart V.8: Bond Yields and Currency Movements
a: 10-year Sovereign Bond Yields - Select AEs b: Currency Indices
Source: Bloomberg.
per cent after the first emergency rate cut by the Fed, (Chart V.8b). Most emerging market currencies, which
reaching an all-time low on March 9, before recovering had strengthened due to risk-on sentiment towards
marginally (Chart V.8a). end-2019, weakened sharply with flight to safety in
Q1:2020. The MSCI Emerging Market Currency Index
Similar rallies were seen in bonds in other AEs, with
increased by 3.6 per cent in Q4:2019 and declined by
yields reaching new lows in the UK and the Euro
area. Bond yields across AEs continued to dip up 6.0 per cent in Q1:2020.
to March 9, but increased sharply thereafter, with
V.5 Conclusion
10-year Japanese yields turning positive. Yields in
EMEs, in general, softened in Q4:2019 with search In sum, global growth prospects have been rendered
for yield driving rates down. However, yields broadly askew by COVID-19, with the near-term outlook
remained range-bound up to February, but sharp risk- extremely weak. Inflation in AEs remains benign, and
off sentiment in March led to a rout and yields across a sharp decline in non-food commodity prices has
these economies rose sharply. imparted a further downward bias. Inflation concerns,
however, remain in some EMEs although considerable
In currency markets, the US dollar weakened against
uncertainty clouds the inflation outlook in the context
major currencies, with the policy rate reduction by
the Fed in October and guidance that it would pause. of COVID-19. Global financial markets have become
The dollar recovered in January with receding of trade extremely volatile. Quick and coordinated actions by
tensions. With COVID-19, safe haven demand pushed monetary authorities and governments have been
up the dollar index further. However, with the virus taken, but there is little evidence as yet that they
spreading to the US and rising fatalities, as well as the could mitigate the risks to the global economy from
rate cut by the Fed, the dollar weakened in early March amplifying.