Published under Section 45ZM of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
Monetary Policy Report
OCTOBER 2021
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai
Contents
Chapter I: Macroeconomic Outlook 1
I.1 : Key Developments since the April 2021 MPR 1
I.2 : The Outlook for Inflation 5
I.3 : The Outlook for Growth 7
I.4 : Balance of Risks 9
I.5 : Conclusion 13
Box I.1: Capital Flow and Exchange Rate Shocks: Macroeconomic Implications 11
Chapter II: Prices and Costs 14
II.1 : Consumer Prices 15
II.2 : Drivers of Inflation 17
II.3 : Costs 31
II.4 : Conclusion 34
Box II.1 : News Sentiment-based Analysis of Food Inflation Outlook 21
Box II.2 : CPI-WPI Inflation Post-Lockdown: Long-run Cointegration and Short-run Error Correction 30
Chapter III: Demand and Output 35
III.1 : Aggregate Demand 36
III.2 : Aggregate Supply 48
III.3 : Conclusion 56
Box III.1: Tracking Macroeconomic Activity using Digital Payments Data 38
Chapter IV: Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions 57
IV.1 : Domestic Financial Markets 57
IV.2 : Monetary Policy Transmission 70
IV.3 : Liquidity Conditions and the Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy 76
IV.4 : Conclusion 82
Box IV.1: External Benchmark Regime and Transmission to Lending Rates 71
Box IV.2: Determinants of Forward Premia – A Macro-Finance Approach 78
Chapter V: External Environment 83
V.1 : Global Economic Conditions 83
V.2 : Commodity Prices and Inflation 89
V.3 : Monetary Policy Stance 94
V.4 : Global Financial Markets 97
V.5 : Conclusion 99
Box V.1: Global Semiconductor Shortage: Opportunities and Challenges 87
Box V.2: Global Commodity Prices: Is a Super Cycle Forming? 91
i
ABBREVIATIONS
AEs - Advanced Economies CII - Confederation of Indian Industry
AEs - Advance Estimates CIP - Covered Interest Parity
AIDC - Agriculture Infrastructure and CLI - Composite Leading Indicator
Development Cess
CMIE - Centre for Monitoring Indian
AIFIs - All India Financial Institutions Economy
APP - Asset Purchase Programme COVID-19 - Coronavirus Disease 2019
AR - Autoregressive CP - Commercial Paper
ARDL - Autoregressive Distributed Lag CPI - Consumer Price Index
ASEAN - Association of Southeast Asian CPI-AL - Consumer Price Index for
Nations Agricultural Labourers
ATM - Automated Teller Machine CPI-IW - Consumer Price Index for Industrial
Workers
BE - Budget Estimates
CPI-RL - Consumer Price Index for Rural
BIC - Bayesian Information Criterion
Labourers
BIES - Business Inflation Expectations
CRR - Cash Reserve Ratio
Survey
CU - Capacity Utilisation
BIS - Bank for International Settlements
DCA - Department of Consumer Affairs
BoC - Bank of Canada
DEH - District as Export Hub
BoE - Bank of England
DGCA - Directorate General of Civil Aviation
BoJ - Bank of Japan
DGCI&S - Directorate General of Commercial
BP - Band-Pass
Intelligence and Statistics
bps - Basis Points
DII - Domestic Institutional Investor
BRICS - Brazil, Russia, India, China and
EBIT - Earnings Before Interest and Taxes
South Africa
ECB - European Central Bank
BSE - Bombay Stock Exchange
ECI - Eight Core Industries
CAD$ - Canadian Dollar
ECLGS - Emergency Credit Line Guarantee
CCIL - Clearing Corporation of India
Scheme
Limited
EMDEs - Emerging Market and Developing
CD - Certificate of Deposit
Economies
CDS - Credit Default Swap
EMEs - Emerging Market Economies
CGA - Controller General of Accounts
EPFO - Employees’ Provident Fund
CI - Confidence Interval Organisation
CiC - Currency in Circulation EU - European Union
iiiiii
Monetary Policy Report October 2021
EXIM - Export-Import Bank of India H2 - Second Half of the Financial Year
(October-March)
FAO - Food and Agriculture Organization
HICP - Harmonised Index of Consumer
FBIL - Financial Benchmarks India Pvt. Ltd
Prices
FDI - Foreign Direct Investment
HSD - High Speed Diesel
FE - Final Estimates
ICICI - Industrial Credit and Investment
Fed - Federal Reserve
Corporation of India
FICCI - Federation of Indian Chambers of
ICR - Interest Coverage Ratio
Commerce and Industry
IIP - Index of Industrial Production
FIMMDA - Fixed Income Money Market and
Derivatives Association of India
IMD - India Meteorological Department
FIs - Financial Institutions
IMF - International Monetary Fund
FL - Family Labour
INR - Indian Rupee
FOMC - Federal Open Market Committee
IOCL - Indian Oil Corporation Limited
FPI - Foreign Portfolio Investment
IPO - Initial Public Offering
FRE - First Revised Estimate
IRDAI - Insurance Regulatory and
FRL - Full Reservoir Level
Development Authority of India
F-TRAC - FIMMDA Trade Reporting and
IRFCL - International Reserves and Foreign
Confirmation System
Currency Liquidity
FY - Financial Year
IT - Information Technology
GDP - Gross Domestic Product
LAF - Liquidity Adjustment Facility
GFCE - Government Final Consumption
LCR - Liquidity Coverage Ratio
Expenditure
LM - Lagrange Multiplier
GFCF - Gross Fixed Capital Formation
GFD - Gross Fiscal Deficit LPA - Long Period Average
GMM - Generalised Method of Moments LPG - Liquefied Petroleum Gas
GNDI - Gross National Disposable Income LPR - Loan Prime Rate
GoI - Government of India LTROs - Long Term Repo Operations
G-SAP - Government Securities Acquisition MAEQ - Maximum Admissible Export Quota
Programme
M-cap - Market Capitalisation
G-Secs - Government Securities
MCLR - Marginal Cost of Funds Based
GST - Goods and Services Tax
Lending Rate
GVA - Gross Value Added
MFs - Mutual Funds
H1 - First Half of the Financial Year
MGNREGA - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
(April-September)
Employment Guarantee Act
iivv
Abbreviations
MMRP - Modified Mixed Reference Period NSO - National Statistical Office
MOAFW - Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ NSS - Net Sentiment Score
Welfare
NSSO - National Sample Survey Office
MoH&FW - Ministry of Health and Family
ODOP - One District One Product
Welfare
OECD - Organisation for Economic Co-
m-o-m - Month-on-Month
operation and Development
MOSPI - Ministry of Statistics and
OMO - Open Market Operations
Programme Implementation
ON RRP - Overnight Reverse Repurchase
MPC - Monetary Policy Committee
Agreement
MPR - Monetary Policy Report
OPEC - Organisation of the Petroleum
MSCI - Morgan Stanley Capital International Exporting Countries
MSEs - Micro and Small Enterprises OTC - Over-the-Counter
MSF - Marginal Standing Facility PADO - Public Administration, Defence and
Other services
MSMEs - Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises PBoC - People’s Bank of China
MSP - Minimum Support Price PC - Principal Component
NABARD - National Bank for Agriculture and PCE - Personal Consumption Expenditure
Rural Development
PDS - Public Distribution System
NBFCs - Non-Banking Financial Companies
PD - Primary Dealer
NCAER - National Council of Applied
PE - Provisional Estimates
Economic Research
PEPP - Pandemic Emergency Purchase
NDS - Negotiated Dealing System
Programme
NDTL - Net Demand and Time Liabilities
PFCE - Private Final Consumption
NEER - Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
Expenditure
NGNF - Non-Government Non-Financial
PIB - Press Information Bureau
NHB - National Housing Bank
PLI - Production Linked Incentive
NIP - National Infrastructure Plan
PMGKAY - Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna
NMEO-OP - National Mission on Edible Oil - Oil Yojana
Palm
PMI - Purchasing Managers’ Index
NMP - National Monetisation Pipeline
POL - Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants
NPA - Non-Performing Asset
POSOCO - Power System Operation
NSC - National Savings Certificate Corporation Limited
NSDL - National Securities Depository PPAC - Petroleum Planning and Analysis
Limited Cell
vv
Monetary Policy Report October 2021
PRN - Production Weighted Rainfall SPECS - Scheme for Promotion of
Manufacturing of Electronic
PSB - Public Sector Bank
Components and Semiconductors
PSU - Public Sector Undertaking
T-Bill - Treasury Bill
PvB - Private Sector Bank
TLTRO - Targeted Long Term Repo Operation
Q1 - First Quarter
TSMC - Taiwan Semiconductor
Q2 - Second Quarter
Manufacturing Company
Q3 - Third Quarter
UK - United Kingdom
Q4 - Fourth Quarter
UNCTAD - United Nations Conference on Trade
q-o-q - Quarter-on-Quarter and Development
QPM - Quarterly Projection Model US - United States
RBD - Refined Bleached Deodorised US$ - US Dollar
RBI - Reserve Bank of India USGS - United States Geological Survey
RD - Revenue Deficit VAR - Vector Autoregression
REER - Real Effective Exchange Rate
VECM - Vector Error Correction Model
RHS - Right Hand Side
VRRR - Variable Rate Reverse Repo
RL - Rural Labourers
WAC - Weighted Average Coupon
RM - Reserve Money
WACR - Weighted Average Call Money Rate
SAAR - Seasonally Adjusted Annualised Rate
WADR - Weighted Average Discount Rate
SCB - Scheduled Commercial Bank
WADTDR - Weighted Average Domestic Term
SDL - State Development Loan Deposit Rate
SEBI - Securities and Exchange Board of WALR - Weighted Average Lending Rate
India
WAM - Weighted Average Maturity
SFB - Small Finance Bank
WAR - Weighted Average Rate
SIAM - Society of Indian Automobile
WEO - World Economic Outlook
Manufacturers
WMA - Ways and Means Advances
SIDBI - Small Industries Development Bank
of India WPI - Wholesale Price Index
SIP - Systematic Investment Plan WTI - West Texas Intermediate
SLF - Special Liquidity Facility WTO - World Trade Organization
SLR - Statutory Liquidity Ratio y-o-y - Year-on-Year
SLTRO - Special Long-Term Repo Operation YTD - Year to Date
vvii
I. Macroeconomic Outlook
Domestic economic activity is normalising after the ferocious second wave retarded momentum. The outlook remains
overcast by the future path of the pandemic; the accelerated pace of vaccination and release of pent-up demand
provide an upside to the baseline growth path. Headline inflation has fallen back into the tolerance band and the
trajectory is expected to be driven by supply-side factors. A faster resolution of supply chain disruptions, good foodgrains
production and effective supply management could cause inflation to undershoot the baseline, contingent on the
evolution of the pandemic and the efficacy of vaccines.
In the months following the retention of the I.1 Key Developments since the April 2021 MPR
inflation target at 4 per cent with a +/- 2 per cent
Since the release of the April 2021 Monetary
tolerance band around it for the period 2021-26 by
Policy Report (MPR), the global macroeconomic
the Government of India (GoI) on March 31, 2021,
environment has been unsettled by diverging paths
the monetary policy framework faced a testing
of economies across the world, between advanced
challenge from a shock price spike in May 2021.
and emerging economies and also among them,
In addition to pandemic-induced disruptions that
mainly differentiated by vaccine access. This is
shaped the trajectory of inflation during the first
reflected most vividly in monetary policy actions
wave, spillovers from the hardening of commodity
and stances, with some of them staying the course
prices, especially of crude and edible oil, propelled
of remaining accommodative and supporting growth
headline inflation above the upper tolerance band.
and others pre-emptively tightening monetary policy
The episode was short-lived though and inflation has
on the assessment that inflation presents a bigger
fallen back into the tolerance band. The monetary
risk. Decoupling of growth paths and the disconnect
policy committee (MPC) decided to look through this
in monetary policy responses pose downside risks
shock, reading it as supply-driven and transitory. In
to the global recovery, which already appears to
its meetings in June and August, the MPC maintained be losing steam. Global economic conditions are
status quo on the policy rate and committed to also besieged by the resurgence of inflation across
remain accommodative as long as it takes to revive the world. Some central banks, mostly in advanced
and sustain growth and mitigate the impact of the economies (AEs), have judged the rise in inflation as
pandemic on the economy. Developments in the real transitory, while some others, mostly in emerging
economy in the first half of 2021-22 have vindicated market economies (EMEs) regard breaches of
this stance – shorn of statistical base effects, upper tolerance bands as unacceptable and growth
aggregate demand trails below pre-pandemic levels threatening. Financial markets are trying to second-
and considerable slack still prevails in the economy, guess the commencement of normalisation. Episodic
especially in contact-dependent sectors that faced shifts in risk appetite have rendered equity markets
the brunt of the pandemic. In the second quarter of frothy with stretched valuations, with intermittent
2021-22, however, a hesitant recovery is underway, flights into and out of the safety of bonds. Meanwhile,
nurtured by the appreciable decline in infections, the EMEs are awash with capital flows and rotations
stepping up of the scale and speed of vaccinations, thereof on taper talk and carry trade and currencies
and the congenial financial conditions engendered have turned volatile as a result. Several countries
by monetary policy. that had unlocked their economies and encouraged

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
mobility have faced renewed surges of infections weaker than anticipated in the April MPR and
from the Delta variant of the virus, which has turned remained below 2019-20 levels. High frequency
the evolving global outlook highly uncertain and indicators of activity suggest that the economy may
fragile. be pulling out of the second wave’s impact, but
uncertainty about the incidence of the third wave
Global growth has been supported by strong external
makes the outlook fraught with risks.
demand on the back of buoyant merchandise trade.
The World Trade Organization’s (WTO) goods trade Thus, the pandemic continues to have an
barometer hit a high in June 2021 reading. The overwhelming influence on global and domestic
20-point year-on-year (y-o-y) rise in the index reflects macroeconomic conditions. Virus mutations
both the strength of the recent trade expansion threaten the progress made through vaccinations
and the depth of the pandemic-induced shock and medical responses. Infections keep flaring up
in 2020. Worryingly, though, the rate of increase
in various geographies, forcing authorities to re-
in the index has started to come off, presaging a
impose restrictions/lockdowns restraining economic
peaking of the upward momentum in world trade.
activity. At the same time, greater adaptability, rising
Container shortages, increased port turnover time
vaccination coverage and continuation of policy
and three major shipping alliances controlling much
support are working towards mitigating the effects
of the supplies have resulted in a jump in freight
of new waves of the pandemic. Equal and universal
rates putting the sustainability of the global trade
vaccination holds the key to a brighter outlook, both
expansion at risk. Services trade continues to lag
globally and domestically.
merchandise trade, with significant contraction in
Monetary Policy Committee: April-September 2021
international travel services, although in Q2 some
improvement is evident, including through revenge During April-September 2021, the MPC met thrice.
tourism, and increase in transport and other goods In the April meeting, the MPC noted that supply
related services boosted by demand for goods and side pressures on inflation could persist while
freight rates. demand-side pull remains moderate. On the gross
domestic product (GDP) growth outlook, the jump in
In India, the recovery that was taking hold from the
COVID-19 infections in certain parts of the country
second half of 2020-21 was disrupted by the second
and the associated localised lockdowns were seen
wave of COVID-19 in the weeks following the release
of the April 2021 MPR. Although the ferocity of the as dampening the demand for contact-intensive
second wave was not anticipated, the loss of output services, restraining growth impulses and prolonging
was about 40 per cent less than during the first wave, as the return to normalcy. In such an environment,
adaptation to pandemic protocols limited restrictions the MPC observed that continued policy support
to localised and region-specific containment remained necessary and unanimously voted to keep
measures instead of the nation-wide lockdown that the policy repo rate unchanged and to continue with
was enforced during the first wave. Nevertheless, the accommodative stance as long as necessary to
inflationary pressures became accentuated, as set out sustain growth on a durable basis and mitigate the
earlier, with erosion in fiscal positions. Against this impact of COVID-19 on the economy, while ensuring
backdrop, the pace of domestic economic activity in that inflation remained within the target going
Q1:2021-22 (April-June) turned out to be somewhat forward.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
In the June 2021 meeting, the MPC observed that the
Table I.1: Monetary Policy Committees and Policy
rising trajectory of international commodity prices, Rate Voting Patterns
especially of crude, together with logistics costs,
Country Policy Meetings: April - September 2021
posed upside risks to the inflation outlook with weak
Total Meetings Meetings Variation
demand conditions tempering the pass-through meetings with full without in policy
consensus full rate (basis
to core inflation. On the growth outlook, the MPC consensus points)
noted that the second wave of COVID-19 had altered Brazil 4 4 0 350
Chile 4 4 0 100
the near-term outlook, and policy support from all
Colombia 4 1 3 25
sides – fiscal, monetary and sectoral – was required Czech Republic 4 1 3 125
to nurture recovery and expedite return to normalcy. Hungary 6 6 0 105
India 3 3 0 0
Accordingly, the MPC decided unanimously to
Israel 4 2 2 0
maintain status quo on the policy repo rate and Japan 4 0 4 0
South Africa 3 3 0 0
continue with the accommodative stance.
Sweden 3 3 0 0
Thailand 4 3 1 0
When the MPC met in August, headline inflation had
UK 4 4 0 0
breached the upper threshold for the second month US 4 4 0 0
in succession in June due to strong momentum Sources: Central bank websites.
in the May print running across all the major sub-
groups. The MPC assessed that the inflationary
For the updated projections set out in this Chapter,
pressures were largely driven by transitory supply
the evolution of key macroeconomic and financial
shocks while stressing that it was conscious of its
variables over the past six months warrants revisions
objective of anchoring inflation expectations. On
in the baseline assumptions as set out below
growth, the MPC noted that the outlook for aggregate
(Table I.2).
demand was improving, but it was still weak and
there was a large amount of slack in the economy, First, global crude oil prices have hardened
with output below its pre-pandemic level. It judged substantially since the April MPR on the back of a
that the nascent and hesitant recovery needed to be rebound in demand and regulated production by the
nurtured. Accordingly, the MPC decided unanimously Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
to keep the policy repo rate unchanged and on a 5 (OPEC) plus. Crude prices initially eased from July
to 1 majority to continue with the accommodative 2021 highs on the back of the decision by OPEC
stance. plus to increase production by 0.4 million barrels
per day on a monthly basis starting August and
The MPC’s voting pattern on the policy repo rate
the moderation in demand due to renewed surge
setting during H1:2021-22 reflected broader
in COVID-19 infections. Crude prices, however,
unanimity in members’ assessments and
hardened again in August-September on supply
expectations, mirroring the voting outcomes in a
disruptions due to hurricanes and fall in inventories.
number of other central banks (Table I.1).
Taking into account these developments, crude prices
Macroeconomic Outlook
(Indian basket) are assumed at US$ 75 per barrel in
Chapters II and III analyse the macroeconomic the baseline, 16 per cent above the April 2021 MPR
developments during H1:2021-22 (April-September). baseline (Chart I.1).

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Table I.2: Baseline Assumptions for Projections Chart I.1: Brent Prices
Indicator MPR April 2021 MPR October 2021
Crude Oil US$ 64.6 per barrel US$ 75 per barrel
(Indian basket) during 2021-22 during H2:2021-22
Exchange rate `72.6/US$ during `74.3/US$ during
2021-22 H2:2021-22
Monsoon Normal for 2021 1 per cent below
long-period average
Global growth 5.5 per cent in 2021 6.0 per cent in 2021
4.2 per cent in 2022 4.9 per cent in 2022
Fiscal deficit To remain within BE To remain within BE
(per cent of GDP) 2021-22 2021-22
Centre: 6.8 Centre: 6.8
Combined: 10.8 Combined: 10.2
Domestic No major change No major change
macroeconomic/
structural
Source: Bloomberg.
policies during the
forecast period
Notes: 1. The Indian basket of crude oil represents a derived numeraire 74.3 per US dollar in the baseline as against INR 72.6
comprising sour grade (Oman and Dubai average) and sweet
grade (Brent) crude oil. in the April MPR.
2. The exchange rate path assumed here is for the purpose of
generating the baseline projections and does not indicate any Third, the strength of global growth and external
‘view’ on the level of the exchange rate. The Reserve Bank is
guided by the objective of containing excess volatility in the demand has been stronger than the April MPR
foreign exchange market and not by any specific level of and/or
baseline, albeit with some loss of momentum
band around the exchange rate.
3. BE: Budget estimates. in recent months over renewed infections and
4. Combined fiscal deficit refers to that of the Centre and States
persisting global supply-demand imbalances in key
taken together.
Sources: RBI estimates; Budget documents; and IMF. inputs such as chips and semiconductors (Chapter
V). Growth prospects of AEs have improved
Second, the nominal exchange rate (the Indian rupee
significantly on better vaccine coverage and higher
or INR vis-à-vis the US dollar) has exhibited two-way
fiscal support relative to emerging market and
movements in a range of INR 72-75 per US dollar
developing economies (EMDEs) (Chart I.2). After a
since April 2021. After depreciating in early-April
strong rebound in Q1:2021, the pace of expansion in
on concerns about the economic fallout from the
global merchandise trade has slowed, weighed down
second wave, the INR remained under appreciating
by elevated shipping charges and logistics costs. The
pressures until May 2021. It depreciated again in
June on a strengthening US dollar and rising crude global manufacturing purchasing managers’ index
oil prices. The INR appreciated in August with the (PMI) remained in expansion at 54.1 in September
resumption of portfolio flows, but this was reversed 2021, unchanged from August's six-month low as
in September. Taking these developments into supply chain issues continued to hinder output
consideration, the exchange rate is assumed at INR growth.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Chart I.2: Global GDP Growth Chart I.3: Inflation Expectations of Households
Source: IMF. Source: Inflation Expectations Survey of Households, RBI.
I.2 The Outlook for Inflation outlook survey expect the cost of raw materials
and selling prices to rise further in Q3:2021-22
Consumer price index (CPI) inflation breached the
(Chart I.4).2 Service sector companies participating in
upper tolerance threshold of 6 per cent in May and
the services and infrastructure outlook survey also
June 2021 driven by supply-side pressures in food,
fuel and core inflation. In August 2021, inflation
Chart I.4: Expectations about Cost of Raw
eased to 5.3 per cent, aided by a moderation in
Materials and Selling Prices
momentum and favourable base effect.
Looking ahead, the three months and one year ahead
median inflation expectations of urban households
fell by 50 basis points (bps) and 60 bps, respectively,
in the September 2021 round of the Reserve Bank’s
survey, tracking actual inflation dynamics.1 The
proportion of respondents expecting the general
price level to increase by more than the current
rate decreased for three months ahead horizon but
Note: Net response is the difference between the respondents reporting
increased for one year ahead horizon vis-à-vis the optimism and those reporting pessimism. The range is -100 to 100. A positive/
negative value of net response is considered as optimistic/pessimistic from the
previous round (Chart I.3).
view point of respondent firms. Therefore, higher positive values of selling
prices indicate increase in output prices while lower values for the cost of raw
Manufacturing firms polled in the July-September
materials indicate higher input price pressures and vice versa.
2021 round of the Reserve Bank’s industrial Source: Industrial Outlook Survey, RBI.
1 The Reserve Bank’s inflation expectations survey of households is conducted in 18 cities and the results of the September 2021 survey are based on
responses from 5,958 households.
2 The results of the July-September 2021 round of the industrial outlook survey are based on responses from 1,414 companies.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
expect further rise in input cost pressure and selling per cent in Q3, and 5.8 per cent in Q4, with risks
prices in Q3:2021-22.3 According to the respondents broadly balanced (Chart I.6). The 50 per cent and
in the manufacturing and services PMIs, input and the 70 per cent confidence intervals for headline
output price pressures persisted in September 2021. inflation in Q4:2021-22 are 4.4-7.2 per cent and
3.6-8.0 per cent, respectively. For 2022-23, assuming
Professional forecasters surveyed by the Reserve
a normalisation of supply chains on the back of
Bank in September 2021 expect CPI inflation to ease
improved vaccination, a normal monsoon and no
from 5.3 per cent in August 2021 to 4.7 per cent in
major exogenous or policy shocks, structural model
Q3:2021-22 and subsequently move up to 5.7 per
estimates indicate that inflation will move in a range
cent in Q4:2021-22 before easing to 4.9 per cent in
Q2:2022-23 (Chart I.5).4 of 4.5-5.2 per cent. The 50 per cent and the 70 per
cent confidence intervals for Q4:2022-23 are 2.7-6.3
Kharif sowing has progressed satisfactorily and
per cent and 1.7-7.2 per cent, respectively.
foodgrains production is estimated to touch a new
record which, along with ample buffer stocks of There are a number of upside and downside risks
foodgrains, should help to contain cereal prices. to the baseline inflation forecasts. The upside risks
Global food, oil and other commodity prices, emanate from a longer-than-expected persistence
however, remain firm. Taking into account the initial of supply chain disruptions; a further hardening of
conditions, signals from forward-looking surveys global commodity prices, especially that of crude oil;
and estimates from structural and other time-series a quicker pass-through of input cost pressures to
models, CPI inflation is projected to move from 5.6 output prices on the back of strong pent-up domestic
per cent during Q1:2021-22 to 5.1 per cent in Q2, 4.5 demand from ebbing infections and vaccination-led
Chart I.5: Professional Forecasters' Chart I.6: Projection of CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
Projection of CPI Inflation
Note: The fan chart depicts uncertainty around the baseline projection
path. The baseline projections are conditioned upon the assumptions set
out in Table I.2. The thick red shaded area represents 50 per cent confidence
interval, implying that there is 50 per cent probability that the actual outcome
will be within the range given by the thick red shaded area. Likewise, for 70
per cent and 90 per cent confidence intervals, there is 70 per cent and 90 per
cent probability, respectively, that the actual outcomes will be in the range
represented by the respective shaded areas.
Sources: Survey of Professional Forecasters, RBI and National Statistical Office. Source: RBI staff estimates.
3 Based on 788 companies polled in July-September 2021 round of services and infrastructure outlook survey.
4 34 panellists participated in the September 2021 round of the Reserve Bank’s survey of professional forecasters.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
consumer confidence; unseasonal rainfall impacting
Chart I.7: Consumer Confidence
crop production; and global financial market volatility
from a faster US monetary policy normalisation. The
downside risks arise from an earlier than expected
mending of supply chain disruptions; the persistence
of weak demand and slack in the economy; and
corrections in global commodity and crude prices
in the event of a weakening of global demand over
new mutants and poor vaccination coverage in low-
income countries.
I.3 The Outlook for Growth
With the ebbing of the second wave, a phased
relaxation of the pandemic-related localised
restrictions, and improving vaccine coverage,
economic activity has been normalising gradually
since June 2021. Looking ahead, prospects for Source: Consumer Confidence Survey, RBI.
the agricultural sector and rural demand look
promising, supported by the late revival in kharif Turning to the key messages from forward-looking
surveys, the consumer confidence (the current
sowing. Urban demand is also likely to accelerate
situation index) in the September 2021 round
with the release of pent-up demand, aided by the
recovered marginally from the all-time low recorded
significant expansion in the pace of vaccination
in May-July 2021, while index for the year ahead
since July and improving consumer confidence –
remained in the optimistic zone, driven by recovery
as of October 6, 2021, nearly 27 per cent of India’s
in sentiments on the general economic situation,
adult population has been fully vaccinated, while
the employment scenario and household spending
71 per cent has received one dose. This augurs well
(Chart I.7).5
for the sustenance of contact-intensive activities
and consumption demand. The government’s focus Sentiments in the manufacturing sector for the
on capital expenditure and continued reform push, quarter ahead strengthened further in the July-
large foreign direct investment flows, congenial September 2021 round of the Reserve Bank’s
monetary and financial conditions, and boom in industrial outlook survey, reflecting optimism on
the initial public offerings provide a conducive production, order books, capacity utilisation, and
employment (Chart I.8). Services and infrastructure
environment for investment activity. There are
sectors expect further strengthening in overall
signs that the investment pipeline could increase
business situation and turnover in Q3:2021-22.
in the rest of 2021-22 and in the coming year, given
the interest in the production linked incentive Surveys by other agencies released during May-July
(PLI) scheme and the continued focus on road generally reported a decline in business expectations
infrastructure. over the previous rounds but remained upbeat from
5 The survey is conducted by the Reserve Bank in 13 major cities and the September 2021 round is based on responses from 5,237 respondents.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart I.8: Business Assessment and Expectations Chart I.9: Professional Forecasters' Projection of
Real GDP Growth
Source: Industrial Outlook Survey, RBI. Sources: Survey of Professional Forecasters, RBI and National Statistical Office.
a year ago (Table I.3). According to the purchasing GDP growth to move from 20.1 per cent in Q1:2021-
managers’ survey for September 2021, the one 22 to 5.9 per cent in Q4; it is expected at 13.1 per
year ahead business expectations of firms in the cent in Q1:2022-23 due to base effects and 6.1 per
manufacturing and services sectors were optimistic cent in Q2 (Chart I.9).
albeit below historical levels.
While the near-term prospects are bolstered by the
Professional forecasters polled in the September lower base of last year, the outlook is contingent
2021 round of the Reserve Bank’s survey expect real on the evolving COVID-19 trajectory. Taking into
account the Q1 growth of 20.1 per cent, baseline
Table I.3: Business Expectations Surveys
assumptions, survey indicators, and model forecasts,
Item NCAER FICCI Dun and CII real GDP growth is projected at 9.5 per cent in 2021-
Business Overall Bradstreet Business
Confidence Business Composite Confidence 22 –7.9 per cent in Q2, 6.8 per cent in Q3, and 6.1 per
Index Confidence Business Index
cent in Q4 – with risks evenly balanced around this
(July 2021) Index Optimism (June 2021)
(May 2021) Index (July baseline path (Chart I.10 and Table I.4).
2021)
For 2022-23, the structural model estimates indicate
Current level of 61.8 51.5 74.2 50.4
the index real GDP growth at 7.8 per cent, with quarterly growth
Index as per 85.2 74.2 61.5 68.7
previous survey rates in the range of 5.0-17.2 per cent, assuming
% change (q-o-q) -27.5 -30.6 20.7 -26.6 restoration of supply chains, a normal monsoon, no
sequential
major exogenous or policy shocks, and full vaccination.
% change (y-o-y) 33.2 20.0 152.4 22.9
There are upside and downside risks to the baseline
Notes:
1. NCAER: National Council of Applied Economic Research. growth path. Stronger-than-expected pent-up demand
2. FICCI: Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry.
3. CII: Confederation of Indian Industry. amidst a faster pace of vaccination and mild variants
Sources: NCAER, FICCI, CII and Dun & Bradstreet Information Services
of the virus, and government’s focus on infrastructure
India Pvt. Ltd.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Table I.4: Projections - Reserve Bank and Chart I.10: Projection of Growth in Real GDP (y-o-y)
Professional Forecasters
(Per cent)
2021-22 2022-23
Reserve Bank’s Baseline Projections
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 5.8 4.5
Real GDP growth 9.5 7.8
Median Projections of Professional Forecasters
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 5.7 4.9*
Real GDP growth 9.4 6.8
Gross domestic saving (per cent of GNDI) 29.5 29.8
Gross capital formation (per cent of GDP) 30.0 30.7
Credit growth of scheduled commercial banks 7.5 8.1
Note: The fan chart depicts uncertainty around the baseline projection
Combined gross fiscal deficit (per cent of GDP) 10.5 9.0
path. The baseline projections are conditioned upon the assumptions set out
Central government gross fiscal deficit (per cent of 6.8 5.6 in Table I.2. The thick green shaded area represents 50 per cent confidence
GDP) interval, implying that there is 50 per cent probability that the actual outcome
will be within the range given by the thick green shaded area. Likewise, for
Repo rate (end-period) 4.0 4.25* 70 per cent and 90 per cent confidence intervals, there is 70 per cent and 90
per cent probability, respectively, that the actual outcomes will be in the range
Yield on 91-days treasury bills (end-period) 3.8 4.3
represented by the respective shaded areas.
Yield on 10-year central government securities 6.4 6.6 Source: RBI staff estimates.
(end-period)
Overall balance of payments (US$ billion) 50.6 35.0 variants, have a significant bearing on the inflation
Merchandise exports growth 30.0 8.0
and growth trajectories. Some plausible alternative
Merchandise imports growth 36.1 9.1
scenarios to assess the balance of risks around the
Current account balance (per cent of GDP) -0.7 -1.1
baseline projections are presented in this section.
*: Q2:2022-23.
Note: GNDI: Gross National Disposable Income.
(i) Global Growth Uncertainties
Sources: RBI staff estimates; and Survey of Professional Forecasters
(September 2021).
While the global growth outlook has been upgraded
relative to the April MPR, it remains highly susceptible
investment and asset monetisation and reform
to COVID-19’s trajectory in view of the uneven spread
measures provide an upside to the baseline growth
of vaccination across countries and more contagious
path. On the contrary, new and more contagious
new variants of the virus, apart from volatility in global
variants of the virus, elevated levels of crude oil and
commodity prices and the elevated uncertainty over
commodity prices, more persistent pandemic-related
US monetary policy normalisation. First, continuing
domestic as well as global supply bottlenecks and
global supply chain disruptions are adversely
global financial market volatility pose downside risks
impacting production in several manufacturing
to the baseline growth path.
activities and could dampen global growth more than
I.4 Balance of Risks
currently anticipated with additional headwinds
The baseline projections of inflation and growth from the steep increase in natural gas prices in recent
presented in the previous sections are premised weeks. Second, a slowing Chinese economy may drag
on the assumptions relating to key domestic and down external demand. Third, if the inflationary
international macroeconomic and financial conditions pressures emanating from the demand-supply
set out in Table I.2. The inherent uncertainties around bottlenecks in the US and other AEs were to turn out
these assumptions, exacerbated by COVID-19 and its to be persistent, it could trigger an earlier exit than

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
currently being telegraphed from the accommodative plus. The supply-demand dynamics in the global oil
policies in the major AEs, induce large financial market are subject to several uncertainties. On the
market volatility and pose downside risks to global supply side, shortfall in the OPEC plus production
growth. Fourth, an escalation of geo-political tensions and rise in geo-political tensions could constrain
remains a potential source of downside risk to global supply and increase oil prices above the baseline. On
growth. In such a scenario, if the global recovery slips the demand side, a better containment of COVID-19
by 100 bps below the baseline, domestic growth and infections could induce higher global growth, a
inflation could be lower by around 40 bps and 30 faster closing of the global output gap and a sharper
bps, respectively. Conversely, a more widespread and increase in international crude oil prices. Assuming
equitable distribution of vaccines across the world, crude oil prices to be 10 per cent above the baseline
sustained success in containing the spread of new (Table I.2), domestic inflation could be higher by 30
mutants, faster resolution of logistic bottlenecks, bps and growth weaker by around 20 bps over the
and the spike in inflation in major AEs reversing baseline. Conversely, crude oil prices could soften
quickly could boost global economic activity. In such below the baseline if the global recovery is more
a scenario, assuming that global growth surprises by subdued owing to a faster spread of virus mutations,
100 bps on the upside, domestic growth and inflation delays in vaccination or improved supplies of shale
could edge higher by around 40 bps and 30 bps, gas. In this scenario, if the price of the crude falls by
respectively (Charts I.11a and I.12a). 10 per cent relative to the baseline, inflation could
ease by around 30 bps with a boost of 20 bps to
(ii) International Crude Oil Prices
growth (Charts I.11a and I.12a).
International crude oil prices have firmed up amidst
(iii) Exchange Rate
elevated volatility with the gradual resumption in
economic activity, improvement in global demand The INR has exhibited two-way movements over the
and calibrated output normalisation by the OPEC past six months, reflecting both global and domestic
Chart I.11: Impact of Risk Scenarios on the Baseline Inflation Path
a. Crude Oil Prices and Global Demand Shocks b. Exchange Rate and Food Price Shocks
Source: RBI staff estimates.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
factors. The divergent paths of recovery across AEs resultant heightened volatility in global financial
and EMEs and the risk of currently elevated inflation markets could lead to a generalised risk aversion
in AEs acquiring a more structural character could to EMEs assets, capital outflows and downward
necessitate an early exit from ultra-accommodative pressures on their currencies (Box I.1). A 5 per cent
monetary policies by the AE central banks. The depreciation of INR from the baseline (Table I.2) in
Box I.1: Capital Flow and Exchange Rate Shocks: Macroeconomic Implications
Capital flows to EMEs ease external financing constraints The macroeconomic implications of capital flows for the
and help to increase domestic investment and growth. On Indian economy can be analysed through the Quarterly
the other hand, such flows are often volatile and prone to Projection Model (QPM)6 (RBI, 2021) under alternative
sudden stops and reversals, causing disorderly movements scenarios. In Scenario 1, the central bank allows the
in the exchange rate that can feed into domestic inflation impact of capital flows to be borne out fully by the
and output. These effects are amplified by interactions exchange rate with no monetary action. In Scenario
with equity and bond markets and derivative positions. 2, movements in the exchange rate pass through into
Furthermore, undesirable and unintended fluctuations in inflation, causing a deviation of inflation from the target
liquidity resulting from volatile capital flows can vitiate that prompts monetary policy action. Alternatively,
the monetary policy stance (Das, 2021). the central bank may resort to a judicious combination
Chart I.1.1: Capital Flows and Exchange Rate: Impact on Inflation and Growth
Change in Reserves* Policy Rate Nominal Exchange Rate
Output Gap Price Level Headline Inflation
*: Per cent of nominal GDP.
Note: x-axes indicate quarters after the shock and y-axes indicate deviations from the baseline path in percentage points. Charts show the impact of an exogenous
capital outflows shock (calibrated to one per cent of nominal GDP) on the economy. Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 are described in the text.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
(Contd.)
6 The QPM is a semi-structural, forward-looking, open economy, calibrated, gap model in the New Keynesian tradition and provides an internally
consistent analysis of various feedback mechanisms (RBI, 2021).

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
of forex intervention and sterilisation, exchange rate a relatively more accommodative monetary policy in
adjustment and monetary policy action (Scenario 3) to support of growth. The Reserve Bank of India undertakes
contain the impact of the volatility in capital flows on the two sided interventions in the spot, forward and futures
domestic economy.
markets to stabilise financial markets and liquidity
In Scenario 1, there is a sustained deviation of inflation conditions so that monetary policy retains its domestic
from the target (Chart I.1.1). Inflation deviations are orientation and the independence to pursue national
relatively contained in scenario 2 but this comes at the objectives.
cost of volatility in output because monetary policy is
References:
calibrated to bring inflation back to the target. Scenario
3, which involves forex intervention and sterilisation, Das, Shaktikanta (2021), “Governor’s Statement”, June 4,
helps to insulate the domestic economy from the capital
2021, Reserve Bank of India.
flows shock, with only marginal impact on inflation and
Reserve Bank of India (2021), Monetary Policy Report,
output. This policy combination reduces volatility in
the forex market and helps the central bank to pursue April 2021.
such a scenario could increase domestic inflation by by around 20 bps and 15 bps, respectively (Charts
up to 20 bps, while GDP growth could be higher by 15 I.11b and I.12b).
bps through a boost to exports. On the other hand,
(iv) Food Inflation
given India’s relatively better growth outlook, boost
to growth from the expanding scale of vaccination Food inflation moderated in July-August from the recent
and reform measures by the government to attract peak in June 2021, driven largely by the deepening
foreign capital, INR could appreciate. In such a deflation of vegetable prices. Inflation in edible oil
scenario, if the INR appreciates by 5 per cent relative prices, however, remains substantially elevated at
to the baseline, inflation and growth could moderate 33.0 per cent in August. The expectations of record
Chart I.12: Impact of Risk Scenarios on the Baseline Growth Path
a. Crude Oil Prices and Global Demand Shocks b. Exchange Rate and Food Price Shocks
Source: RBI staff estimates.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
kharif foodgrains production and large buffer stocks pace of vaccination, release of pent-up demand in the
for cereals augur well for food prices. These upcoming festival season, boost to investment activity
developments along with continued effective from the government’s focus on infrastructure and
supply management of key food items and easing asset monetisation, and accommodative monetary
of international food prices could soften headline
and liquidity conditions provide an upside to the
inflation by around 50 bps. Conversely, a further
baseline growth path. While the inflation trajectory
hardening of international food prices, demand-
is expected to be driven by supply-side factors and
supply imbalances in some food items and unseasonal
risks are to the upside, a faster resolution of global
rainfall could exert upward pressure on headline
as well as domestic supply chain disruptions,
inflation by around 50 bps (Charts I.11b and I.12b).
softer international crude oil and food prices as
I.5 Conclusion pent-up demand normalises, and another round of
Domestic economic activity is normalising after the good foodgrains production and effective supply
ferocious second wave retarded momentum. The management, could cause inflation to undershoot
outlook remains overcast by the future path of the the baseline, contingent on the evolution of the
pandemic; however, the accelerated progress in the pandemic and the efficacy of vaccines.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
II. Prices and Costs
Consumer price index (CPI) inflation remained highly volatile during March-August this year – after moderating
close to the target rate in April, it rose abruptly to breach the upper tolerance threshold during May-June with a
sharp pickup in food, fuel and core inflation and moderated in July-August on substantial softening in food inflation.
Costs of farm and non-farm inputs remained elevated. Nominal rural wages for both agricultural and non-
agricultural labourers were stagnant while staff costs in the organised sector rose.
Since the publication of the April 2021 MPR, headline moderated by one percentage point to 5.3 per cent
CPI inflation1 that had fallen close to the target rate by August on a substantial softening in food inflation
of 4.0 per cent in April, sprang back amidst the even as fuel infation scaled another high and core
second wave of intense infections to breach the upper inflation remained sticky and elevated. On the whole,
tolerance threshold and touched 6.3 per cent during CPI inflation has been highly volatile in the five
May-June 2021.2 This unanticipated spike came from months of the current financial year – moving within
a wide range of 4.2 per cent to 6.3 per cent – averaging
a sharp pick-up in food and core (CPI excluding food
5.5 per cent (Chart II.1).
and fuel3) inflation which peaked peaked at 6.6 per
cent in May 2021 – the highest since May 2014, and The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act enjoins the RBI
fuel inflation which at 12.6 per cent in June 2021 to set out deviations of actual inflation outcomes
was the then highest recorded in the CPI series. In from projections, if any, and explain the underlying
the following months, however, inflation quickly reasons thereof. The April 2021 MPR had projected
Chart II.1: CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
Note: The imputed CPI prints for April and May 2020 have been regarded as a break in the CPI series.
Sources: National Statistical Office (NSO); and RBI staff estimates.
1 Headline inflation is measured by year-on-year changes in all-India consumer price index – combined (CPI-C).
2 CPI inflation for April-May 2021 was computed based on imputed CPI indices for April-May 2020.
3 Core CPI, i.e. CPI excluding food and fuel is worked out by eliminating the groups ‘food and beverages’ and ‘fuel and light’ from the headline CPI.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
range-bound movement in CPI inflation – an average normalised, the effects of these factors dissipated
of 5.0 per cent in Q4:2020-21 to 5.2 per cent in Q1 and from June. Second, the unanticipated surge in global
Q2 of 2021-22. Actual inflation for Q1:2021-22 at 5.6 energy prices kept petrol and diesel inflation firmly
per cent and Q2:2021-22 (July-August) at 5.4 per cent in double digits. The April 2021 MPR had assumed an
turned out to be higher than the projections by 35 bps Indian basket crude oil price of US$ 64.6 per barrel
and 27 bps, respectively (Chart II.2). during 2021-22; however, crude oil prices edged up to
a peak level of US$ 75 per barrel in early July before
A number of factors impinging on food, fuel and core
moderating to US$ 70 per barrel by end-August. Third,
contributed to this overshoot. First, the rapid spread
there was an extraordinary surge in international
of COVID-19’s second wave at the start of 2021-22
edible oil prices which fed into domestic inflation
resulted in restrictions on activity being imposed over
formation.5 Fourth, the persistence of industrial
a large swath of the country. These restrictions, in turn,
input and transport cost pressures and subsequent
resulted in transitory price pressures in Q1, especially
transmission to selling prices of manufactured
in May, through supply-chain disruptions, elevated
goods was more than what was anticipated, in spite
retail margins as well as from difficulties in accurate
of demand conditions weakening due to the second
price measurements due to localised lockdowns and wave.
restrictions on non-essential commercial activities
II.1 Consumer Prices
in several states.4 As restrictions eased and activity
A dip in inflation to 4.2 per cent in April 2021 was
overwhelmed in May 2021 by a sharp pick up in
Chart II.2: CPI Inflation (y-o-y):
price momentum6 spanning across food, fuel and
Projection versus Actual
core groups, resulting in a surge in inflation by 2.1
percentage points to 6.3 per cent. In June, headline
inflation plateaued, with positive price momentum
completely neutralised by a favourable base effect
which became even larger in July and more than
offset the broad-based price momentum taking down
headline inflation to 5.6 per cent in July. With overall
price momentum registering a sharp deceleration
in August, coming from a steady food price index,
headline inflation moderated further to 5.3 per cent
(Chart II.3).
The distribution of CPI inflation during January-
*: Projection for entire Q2:2021-22 vis-a-vis actual average inflation during July-
August 2021. August 2021 varied distinctly from the pattern in
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
the past few years. There has been a shift in the
4 In May 2021, the market-wise price reporting fell to 68.1 per cent in rural areas (from 84.6 per cent in April 2021 and 89.1 per cent in March 2021)
and 67.5 per cent in urban areas (from 87.4 per cent in April 2021 and 93.6 per cent in March 2021).
5 About 58 per cent of the domestic consumption of edible oil is imported.
6 A change in CPI year-on-year (y-o-y) inflation between any two months is the difference between the current month-on-month (m-o-m) change in the
price index (momentum) and the m-o-m change in the price index 12 months earlier (base effect). For more details, see Box I.1 of the MPR, September
2014.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart II.3: CPI Inflation – Momentum and Base Effects
a: CPI Headline b: CPI Food and Beverages
c: CPI Fuel and Light d: CPI excluding Food and Fuel
Note: The y-o-y inflation for April and May 2021 have been calculated based on the imputed index for April and May 2020 released by NSO.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
mean of the distribution from 3.4 per cent for 2017-
Chart II.4: Average CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
2019 (January-August) to 5.3 per cent in 2021 so far (Kernel Density Estimates)
(Chart II.4). This was accompanied by an increase in
volatility – with the standard deviation in 2021 more
than two times that of 2017-2019 – and positive
skewness, compared to a negative skew for the
2017-2019 period. These indicate high dispersion of
inflation rates in the CPI basket, along with a larger
number of items experiencing higher inflation rates
than in the pre-pandemic period. The positive skew
reflected outlier double-digit inflation in the CPI
distribution, primarily on account of oils and fats.
During April-August 2021, 8 of the 23 sub-groups
in CPI with a cumulative weight of 49.7 per cent
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Table II.1: Contribution of CPI sub-groups to Headline CPI Inflation
Sr. Commodity Weight FY 2020-21 (June-March)* FY 2021-22 (April-August)
No.
Average inflation Average contribution Average inflation Average contribution
(y-o-y, per cent) (per cent) (y-o-y, per cent) (per cent)
1 Oils and fats 3.56 16.8 9.1 31.4 18.3
2 Transport and communication 8.59 10.6 13.4 11.1 15.6
3 Fuel and light 6.84 2.8 3.3 11.6 13.4
4 Health 5.89 5.4 5.7 7.9 8.6
5 Meat and fish 3.61 16.0 10.8 9.6 8.0
6 Housing 10.07 3.2 5.8 3.8 7.2
7 Prepared meals, snacks, sweets etc. 5.55 4.5 4.7 5.6 6.0
8 Clothing 5.58 3.4 3.4 5.7 5.7
Total 49.69 6.8 56.2 9.4 82.7
CPI-Combined 100.00 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0
* The imputed CPI prints for April and May 2020 have been regarded as a break in the CPI series.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
contributed 82.7 per cent of CPI inflation, much higher
Chart II.5 Diffusion Indices: CPI
than their contribution of 56.2 per cent in 2020-21
(M-o-M Non-Seasonally Adjusted)
(Table II.1).
The non-seasonally adjusted diffusion indices of price
changes7 remained elevated (barring for services in
June), indicative of price increases being broad-based
across the CPI basket (Chart II.5).8
II.2 Drivers of Inflation
The role of various factors impinging upon
inflation dynamics can be captured through vector
autoregression (VAR) estimates and historical
decomposition.9 Inflationary pressures in Q1:2021-22
can be attributed to adverse supply shocks, firming
up of asset prices and easy monetary conditions,
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
even as muted demand conditions contributed to a
softening of inflationary pressures. By Q2:2021-22
In terms of contribution of goods and services to
some softening in inflationary pressures came about
headline inflation, the pick-up in inflation in June
from softening of wage pressures (Chart II.6a).
7 In view of the non-availability of CPI item level data for the period March-May 2020, the diffusion indices have been constructed with item level indices
without seasonal adjustment.
8 The CPI diffusion index, a measure of dispersion of price changes, categorises items in the CPI basket according to whether their prices have risen,
remained stagnant or fallen over the previous month. A reading above 50 for the diffusion index signals a broad expansion or generalisation of price
increases and a reading below 50 signals broad-based price decline.
9 Historical decomposition estimates the contribution of each shock to the movements in inflation over the sample period (Q4:2010-11 to Q1:2021-22)
based on a vector autoregression (VAR) with the following variables (represented as the vector Y) – crude oil prices; exchange rate (INR per US$), asset
t
price (BSE Sensex), CPI; the output gap; rural wages; the policy repo rate; and money supply (M). All variables other than policy repo rate are growth rates.

The VAR can be written in reduced form as: Y =c + A Y + e; where e represents a vector of shocks. Using Wold decomposition, Y can be represented
t t-1 t t t
as a function of its deterministic trend and sum of all the shocks e. This formulation facilitates decomposition of the deviation of inflation from its
t
deterministic trend into the sum of contributions from various shocks.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
2021 emanated from perishables – edible oils, fruits semi-perishables, durables and services to headline
and vegetables – and semi-perishable goods (non- inflation were largely steady (Chart II.6b). Some
durable goods with a 30-day recall10) like LPG, kerosene, of the stickiness in semi-perishables and durables
petrol, diesel, medicines and fast-moving consumer goods inflation reflected the transmission of high
international prices.
goods (FMCGs). In July-August, the contribution
of perishables to headline inflation registered a The surge in international prices of edible oil, silver
sharp moderation, even as the contributions of and petroleum products resulted in an increase in
Chart II.6: Drivers of CPI Inflation
a: Decomposition of CPI Inflation*
* Deviation from deterministic trend.
Note: Estimated using a vector autoregression (see footnote 9 for details).
Sources: NSO; RBI; Petroleum Planning & Analysis Cell (PPAC); BSE; Labour Bureau; and RBI staff estimates.
b: Contribution of Goods and Services c: Contribution of Imported Inflation
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
10 The CPI weighting diagrams use the modified mixed reference period (MMRP) data based on the 2011-12 Consumer Expenditure Survey conducted
by the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO). Under MMRP, data are collected on expenditure incurred for frequently purchased items – edible oil, eggs,
fish, meat, vegetables, fruits, spices, beverages, processed foods, pan, tobacco and intoxicants – during the last seven days; for clothing, bedding, footwear,
education, medical (institutional), durable goods, during the last 365 days; and for all other food, fuel and light, miscellaneous goods and services
including non-institutional medical services, rents and taxes, data relate to the last 30 days.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
the contribution of imported components to headline alcoholic beverages and spices were higher than their
inflation – from 0.8 percentage points in February to long-term averages (Chart II.8). Excluding vegetables,
a peak level of 1.9 percentage points in June before during April-August 2021, food and headline inflation
moderating to 1.4 percentage points in August 2021 would have averaged 6.3 per cent and 6.5 per cent
(Chart II.6c). respectively, as against an overall average rate of 4.3
per cent for food and 5.5 per cent for headline.
Food Group
Prices of cereals (weight of 9.7 per cent in the CPI
Food and beverages inflation treaded within a range
and 21.1 per cent in the food and beverages group)
of 2-6 per cent during March-August 2021 and on an
remained in deflation during March-August 2021,
average contributed around 37.2 per cent of headline
primarily reflecting favourable base effects and
inflation (CPI food has a weight of 45.9 per cent in
the CPI basket). Elevated international prices of edible muted momentum. Within cereals, both rice and
oils along with price pressures in protein rich items wheat witnessed subdued price pressures (barring
remained the major drivers (Chart II.7). The summer May 2021) on the back of ample buffer stocks relative
uptick in vegetables prices during May-July 2021 led to norms (2.7 times and 1.8 times for rice and
to an increase in price pressures, while a decline wheat, respectively, as on September 16, 2021) and
in prices of cereals, protein-based food and fruits distribution under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna
along with a sharp deceleration in vegetable price Yojana (PMGKAY). In May 2021, restrictions on activity
momentum in August 2021 provided relief dragging across many states affected supply chains leading to
down food inflation to 3.8 per cent. Overall, the a pick up in prices. Moreover, production remained
food price build-up in the financial year so far has robust, with an increase of 2.9 per cent for rice and 1.5
been lower than historical patterns, even as price per cent for wheat (as per the 4th Advance Estimates
build-ups in oils and fats, eggs, meat and fish, non- (AE) 2020-21) over 2019-20 Final Estimates (FE).
Chart II.7: CPI Food Inflation
a: Drivers of CPI Food Inflation b: Drivers of CPI Protein-based Food Inflation
*: Includes meat & fish, egg, milk and pulses.
**: Includes fruits, sugar, non-alocoholic beverages and prepared meals. Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI-Protein based food.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI food and beverages.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart II.8: Financial Year Price Build-up
(August over March)
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI- food and beverages.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
In the case of vegetables (weight of 6.0 per cent in the uptick. While prices of potatoes and onions eased in
CPI and 13.2 per cent in the food and beverages group), August 2021, tomato prices picked up due to lower
prices remained in deflation during March-August supply in the markets as the lean period set in. Crop
2021 (Chart II.9), reflecting, inter alia, favourable base damage due to heavy rains and flood like situations in
effects. The three key vegetables – tomatoes, onions major tomato producing states such as Andhra Pradesh
and potatoes – largely witnessed price increases and Karnataka also impacted mandi arrivals. After
during May-July 2021 less than the usual summer moderating during March-May 2021, onion prices
Chart II.9: Drivers of Vegetables Inflation (y-o-y)
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate items' weights in CPI-Vegetables. Item level data were not released by NSO for the months of March, April and May 2020.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
edged up subsequently, reflecting the seasonal uptick historical average in the financial year so far, reflecting
as well as damage to stored rabi onions in Maharashtra the recovery of production (higher by 4.2 per cent in
and Gujarat due to cyclone Tauktae. Potato prices 2020-21 2nd AE compared to 2019-20 FE).
were in deflation during June-August 2021, reflecting
In a rapidly changing scenario where volatility in
favourable base effects and easing of prices in August
prices of key vegetables has substantial fallout
2021 with higher production (10.6 per cent in 2020- on headline inflation, there is a need for real
21) in response to elevated prices observed in the time monitoring of price situation, especially in
previous year, and higher cold storage stocks in major case of perishables. Price sentiment derived from
producing states. On the whole, as noted earlier, the unstructured data contained in news articles can
price build-up in vegetables remained lower than their provide useful leading information on prices (Box II.1).
Box II.1: News Sentiment-based Analysis of Food Inflation Outlook
Strengthening market intelligence on high-impact food weight of 2.2 per cent in the CPI, have high contribution
items is an integral element in inflation forecasting to variance in food price inflation (Chart II.1.1).
framework of the Reserve Bank. Newspaper articles
A lexicon-based approach was adopted for computation
provide information on local events that may lead to large
of commodity-wise sentiment index, based on news
swings in nation-wide retail food prices. Unstructured
items published in nine leading news dailies during
textual data in news items can be processed and quantified
the period 2016-202011. For each commodity-specific
using text-mining techniques to analyse the nature of news item, the Loughran-McDonald lexicon, designed
shocks and inflation dynamics. Three main vegetables viz., specifically for analysing economic and financial texts
tomatoes, onions and potatoes (TOP), with a combined was used to assign a sentiment score to each
polarized word occurring in a news article published
at time (Loughran and McDonald, 2011). ‘Positive’
Chart II.1.1: Contribution of TOP to Variance in
(indicating easing in prices) and ‘negative’ (indicating
Food Inflation
increase in prices) words were assigned a sentiment
score of (+1) and (-1), respectively. A sentiment score
( ) was computed at the document level such that
where represents the total number
of polarized words and is the total number of words
in a news article. The document-wise sentiment score
was aggregated across time such that
represents the time-series for the final net sentiment
score (NSS), where is total number of news articles for
the given commodity on day ‘t’. Accordingly, a positive
sentiment score indicates an expected fall in prices,
while a negative sentiment score suggests an expected
Note: * Covers April 2019 to February 2020, as item level data for March-May increase in prices.
2020 were not released by NSO.
(Contd.)
11 Measured using words occurring in each news article, sentiments in this context can be construed to convey optimism (decrease) or pessimism
(increase) about the price situation of a given commodity. For the analysis, a novel dataset of daily news items published in nine leading news dailies
during 2016-2020 was constructed and filtered based on occurrence of keywords encompassing ‘supply’, ‘demand’ and ‘prices’ of TOP commodities. The
framework laid down by Ardia et al. (2021) was used for sentiment computation and analysis.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart II.1.2: Major Price Shock Events and Net Sentiments
(a) Tomato
(b) Onion
(c) Potato
Note: The shaded areas in graphs represent the following episodes:
Tomato: (I) Heatwave affected production (II) Farmers’ protests (III) Excess rains; Onion: (I) Excess rains (II) Late withdrawal of monsoon (III) Excess rains; Potato: (I) Low
production – blight in West Bengal (II) Low production (III) Low storage.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
Monthly net sentiment score of TOP and changes causality test), which could be useful for nowcasting of
in their prices as reflected in CPI show a negative food price inflation.
relationship between them, as expected (Chart II.1.2).
References:
Large increases in TOP prices seen after major supply
shocks coincide with large fall in sentiment related Ardia, D., Bluteau, K., Borms, S., and Boudt, K. (2021).
to each of the three commodities. Sentiments were The R Package Sentometrics to Compute, Aggregate and
found to ‘Granger cause’ change in prices, implying the Predict with Textual Sentiment. Journal of Statistical
predictive power of news-based sentiment in capturing Software, 99(2).
future price movements of TOP. The results show that
Loughran, T., and McDonald, B. (2011). When is a Liability
NSS can provide forward-looking information for price
not a Liability? Textual Analysis, Dictionaries, and 10-
movements in TOP (up to 30 days as per the Granger
Ks. The Journal of Finance, 66(1), 35-65.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Despite pulses production of 257.2 lakh tonnes chicken, mutton and fish surged as a consequence
during 2020-21, an increase of 11.7 per cent over of several factors – increase in soybean meal prices
2019-20 – augmenting domestic supply and overall (international soybean meal prices increased by 32.3
stocks, factors like localised lockdowns in the second per cent in July 2021 compared to July 2020); restricted
wave resulted in supply chain driven demand- operations of the poultry industry during the second
supply gaps, accentuated by lower arrival of imports wave; festive demand in July 2021; damage of fishing
and precarious stock positions in the case of masur boats owing to cyclones Tauktae and Yaas; higher fuel
(Chart II.10). To address the tight demand supply prices and the annual ban on fishing in the west coast
situation, the government undertook several supply during monsoons. However, prices eased in August
side initiatives such as imposing stock limits in 2021 reflecting seasonal fall in demand during the
July 2021 on some pulses under the Essential month of sravana.
Commodities Act, 1955, easing import restrictions
In the case of milk and products (weight of 6.6 per cent
to enhance domestic availability of tur, urad and
in the CPI and 14.4 per cent in the food and beverages
moong, a memorandum of understanding (MoUs)
group), a lean season of production coincided with
with Myanmar, Malawi and Mozambique for
upward revision in retail prices by ` 2 per litre by
pulses imports, and reducing basic import duty and
major milk co-operatives like Amul and Mother Dairy
Agriculture Infrastructure and Development Cess
in July 2021 which was followed by many other state
(AIDC) on masur to 0 per cent12 and 10 per cent,
milk co-operatives such as Milkfed in Punjab, Gokul
respectively.
in Maharashtra and Parag in Uttar Pradesh, resulting
Inflation in meat, fish and eggs witnessed upside in price pressures in July 2021. Milk cooperatives
pressures during March-July 2021 primarily reflecting have cited various reasons for increase in input costs
feed cost pressures and transportation costs such as cost of transport, feed prices and operational
(Chart II.11a). Prices of key items such as eggs, costs of processing and packaging. However, post July
Chart II.10: Pulses Inflation and Stock-Use Ratio: Monthly Balance Sheet
Sources: MOSPI, DGCIS, CACP, Ministry of Agriculture and RBI staff estimates.
12 For non-US origin.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
2021, no increase in retail milk prices by other milk applicable till December 31, 2021. Further, effective
cooperatives has been reported. September 11, 2021, import duty on crude and refined
palm oil was reduced from 10 per cent to 2.5 per cent
Inflation in oils and fats experienced price pressures
(effective rate reduced from 30.25 per cent to 24.75
in the post-lockdown period and shot up to an all-time
per cent) and 37.5 per cent to 32.5 per cent (effective
high of 34.8 per cent in June 2021, mirroring elevated
rate reduced from 41.25 per cent to 35.75 per cent),
international edible oil prices (Chart II.11b). Prices fell
respectively. However, price pressures continued in
in July 2021 in response to the supply side measures
the domestic market (barring in July 2021) as Malaysia
announced by the government, before showing some
increased its export reference price for July 2021,
uptick in August to 33.0 per cent. Global palm oil
maintaining its export duty at the highest rate of 8.0
prices escalated due to labour shortage in Malaysia
per cent. To control domestic edible oil prices, import
and adverse weather conditions leading to lower than
expected production and high export duties on crude duty on crude soybean and sunflower oil were reduced
palm oil. A number of measures were taken to alleviate from 15.0 per cent to 7.5 per cent, effective August 20,
price pressures, including reduction in import duty on 2021 and it was further reduced to 2.5 per cent from
crude and refined palm oil from 15.0 per cent to 10.0 September 11, 2021. Similarly, import duty on refined
per cent (effective rate reduced from 35.75 per cent soybean and sunflower oils was reduced from 45.0 per
to 30.25 per cent) and 45.0 per cent to 37.5 per cent cent to 37.5 per cent and further to 32.5 per cent with
(effective rate reduced from 49.5 per cent to 41.25 per the same effective dates. To attain self-sufficiency in
cent), respectively; mechanism for speedy clearance production of edible oil, the Government announced
of crude palm oil at shipping ports and placing the a National Mission on Edible Oil - Oil Palm (NMEO-
imports of Refined Bleached Deodorized (RBD) palm OP) with an investment of over `11,000 crore and
oil and RBD palmolein under free category from assured farmers access to all facilities, from quality
restricted category effective from June 30, 2021 and seeds to technology.
Chart II.11: Drivers of Price Pressures in Animal Protein and Oils and Fats
a: Drivers of Animal Protein Price s b: Movement in Edible Oil Inflation:
(H1:2021-22 over H2:2020-21) Global vs Domestic
Note: Data for H1:2021-22 pertain to April-August 2021. Figures in parentheses indicate weight in CPI-animal protein group.
Sources: NSO and World Bank Pink Sheet.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Price of sugar and confectionery (weight of 1.4 per Retail Margins
cent in the CPI and 3.0 per cent in the food and
Retail price margins, defined as the difference
beverages group) remained in deflation during March-
between retail and wholesale prices for four major
August 2021, except for June 2021, due to higher
sub-groups – cereals, pulses, vegetables and edible oil
domestic availability as a result of robust production
– have shown divergent movements.13 The margins
(sugarcane production rose by 7.8 per cent in 2020-21
in case of edible oils, pulses and cereals have risen
4th AE over 2019-20 FE) and export subsidy for sugar unceasingly, since the first wave of the COVID-19
export under MAEQ (Maximum Admissible Export pandemic. Margins in case of vegetables are back to
Quota) being reduced to `4000 per tonne from `6000 the usual seasonal pattern in absence of any major
per tonne, effective May 20, 2021. supply side disturbance (Chart II.12).
CPI Fuel Group
Among other items in the CPI food group, prices
firmed up in the case of non-alcoholic beverages and CPI fuel inflation surged from 4.4 per cent in March
prepared meals, reflecting increase in input costs. 2021 to 12.6 per cent in June 2021 before showing a
Chart II.12: Retail Margins
a: Cereals b: Pulses
c: Vegetables d: Edible Oil
Sources: Department of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution; and RBI staff estimates.
13 Item level retail and wholesale prices sourced from the Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA) are aggregated at respective subgroup using item level
CPI weights. Data for January-March 2021 have been excluded due to changes in price collection mechanism and item varieties by DCA.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
transitory dip in July. In August 2021, fuel inflation contribution of fuel items of rural consumption like
touched an all-time high of 12.9 per cent (Chart firewood and chips was also substantial during June-
II.13a). The year-on-year price changes in LPG and August 2021 (Chart II.13b and II.13c).
kerosene (PDS) during June-August 2021 were one of
CPI excluding Food and Fuel
the highest recorded in the current CPI series. Market
prices of crude and various oil-based fuels have CPI core inflation, i.e. CPI inflation excluding food and
firmed up through the waves of the pandemic pulling fuel, remained elevated and sticky in the financial
up kerosene and LPG fuel prices (Chart II.13c). The year so far, reflecting persistent cost-push pressures
Chart II.13: CPI Fuel Group Inflation
a: Drivers
*: Includes diesel [excl. conveyance], coke, coal, charcoal and other fuels.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI - fuel and light.
b: Kerosene: Domestic and International Prices c: LPG: Domestic and International Prices
Notes: (1) The international price for LPG is based on spot prices for Saudi Butane and Propane, combined in the ratio of 60:40 respectively. These international product
prices are indicative import prices. Further details are available at www.ppac.org.in.
(2) The indicative international price for kerosene is the Singapore Jet Kero spot price.
(3) The domestic prices of LPG and kerosene represent the average prices at four metros from Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL).
Sources: NSO; Bloomberg; IOCL; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Table II.2: Exclusion-based Measures of Inflation (y-o-y) Chart II.14: Contribution to CPI excluding Food
Period CPI excluding CPI excluding CPI excluding Fuel (Core) Inflation (in percentage points)
food and fuel food, fuel, food, fuel, petrol,
(47.3) petrol and diesel, gold and
diesel (45.0) silver (43.8)
Jun-19 4.1 4.6 4.6
Sep-19 4.2 4.9 4.5
Dec-19 3.8 3.7 3.3
Mar-20 3.9
Jun-20 5.4 5.3 4.6
Sep-20 5.4 5.2 4.5
Dec-20 5.6 5.3 4.7
Jan-21 5.5 5.2 4.7
Feb-21 6.0 5.5 5.1
Mar-21 5.9
Apr-21 5.3
May-21 6.6
Jun-21 6.1 5.3 5.4
Jul-21 5.8 5.1 5.3
Aug-21 5.8 5.1 5.5
Note: (1) Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
(2) Derived as residual from headline CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
* Others include pan, tobacco and intoxicants; and recreation and amusement.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI excluding food and fuel.
even as demand conditions remained sluggish. Core Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
inflation, from a peak level of 6.6 per cent in May,
moderated to 6.1 per cent in June and to 5.8 per cent 2021 – has kept petrol and diesel inflation firm at 23.8
during July-August. Excluding petrol and diesel, it has per cent in August. This was starkly evident in the
also remained sticky in the range of 5.1-5.5 per cent
WPI which excluded indirect tax effects; WPI petrol
throughout the pandemic period (Table II.2).
and diesel inflation was at 54.2 per cent in August
In term of sub-groups, transport and communication, (Chart II.15a). Petrol pump prices were at historic
clothing and footwear and health accounted for more highs in early 2021 and breached `100 per litre by
than 60 per cent of core inflation (weight of these July 2021, with attendant implications for overall cost
sub-groups is around 45 per cent in the core CPI). conditions in the economy (Chart II.15b).
On the other hand, the contributions of housing and
After abstracting the effects of generally volatile
education sub-groups to core inflation in the financial
items, i.e., food, fuel, petrol, diesel, gold and silver,
year so far have been lower than in the pre-pandemic
core inflation rose from 5.1 per cent in February to 5.5
period (Chart II.14).
per cent in August, attesting to persistence (Table II.2).
Overall, goods inflation is driving the core, with
A decomposition of CPI excluding food, fuel, petrol,
petrol and diesel (under the transportation and
diesel, gold and silver into goods and services
communication sub-group) registering double digit
components points to contrasting movements.
inflation consecutively since July 2020. Even as the
one-off effects of indirect taxes instituted in the post- Inflation in the goods component (with a weight of
lockdown period waned from June 2021, the sustained 20.7 per cent in CPI) has been undergoing consecutive
increase in international crude oil prices – by around increases from August 2020, reaching 6.5 per cent in
104 per cent between end-May 2020 and end-August August 2021. This was driven primarily by clothing

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart II.15: Petrol and Diesel Prices
a: Petrol and Diesel Inflation (y-o-y) b: Petrol Price Build-up*
*: IOCL Delhi prices.
Sources: PPAC; NSO; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.
and footwear, health care – particularly medicines (Chart II.16a). On the other hand, services inflation
– household goods like utensils, washing soap/ (with a weight of 23.0 per cent in CPI) which was at
powder, furniture, personal care items and toiletries 4.3 per cent in February, firmed up moderately to 4.5
Chart II.16: Contributions to CPI Inflation excluding Food, Fuel, Petrol, Diesel, Gold and Silver
a: Goods b: Services
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
per cent in August 2021. The contribution of services,
Table II.3: Trimmed Mean Measures of
on an average, to core inflation was somewhat lower Inflation (y-o-y)
than what was seen in the pre-pandemic period Period 5% 10% 25% Weighted
trimmed trimmed trimmed Median
(Chart II.14). A recovery in housing rentals along with
Jun-19 3.0 3.1 3.0 2.8
rising education services inflation from the post-
Sep-19 3.3 3.2 3.1 2.8
lockdown historic lows are the key drivers for the Dec-19 4.4 4.0 3.7 4.0
uptick in core services inflation between February Mar-20
Jun-20 5.8 5.4 5.1 4.9
and August 2021, apart from medical as well as
Sep-20 6.2 5.6 4.7 5.1
household services (Chart II.16b).
Dec-20 5.6 5.1 4.3 4.0
Jan-21 5.0 4.8 4.0 3.6
In order to filter noise from CPI inflation and get
Feb-21 5.1 4.9 4.1 3.7
to the underlying inflation dynamics two common
Mar-21
approaches are (i) excluding a fixed set of components Apr-21
from the CPI basket that display volatile price May-21
Jun-21 5.7 5.2 5.0 5.2
movements and are likely to be transitory; and (ii)
Jul-21 5.8 5.3 5.0 4.6
excluding different components each month if they
Aug-21 5.5 5.1 4.9 4.3
are located in the tails of the inflation distribution.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
The exclusion-based measures show heightened
inflationary pressures over the last six months
2011-12=100) in May from a sharp and broad-based
with no decisive signs of softening (Table II.2).
upsurge in price momentum in an environment of
Inflation measured by trimmed means, on the other
adverse base effects. WPI inflation moderated in
hand, shows some edging down of the underlying
June and July 2021, despite positive price pressures,
inflation pressures in August from the June-July peak
owing to base effects turning favourable, although it
(Table II.3).
remained in double digits. In August, WPI inflation
Other Measures of Inflation reversed course and edged up to 11.4 per cent
primarily on account of an increase in non-food
Over the last 14 months, inflation in sectoral CPIs
manufactured products inflation, despite softening
for agricultural labourers (CPI-AL) and rural labourers
of food inflation. In line with WPI inflation, the
(CPI-RL) has remained below CPI headline inflation.
Lower food inflation, paired with their higher weights deflators for gross value added (GVA) and gross
in CPI-AL and CPI-RL contributed to the lower CPI- domestic product (GDP) edged up sharply between
AL and CPI-RL inflation prints. Inflation in terms of Q3:2020-21 to Q1:2021-22.
the CPI for industrial workers (CPI-IW) fell below the
WPI inflation has averaged 11.7 per cent during April-
headline during May-August 2021.
August 2021, remaining markedly above CPI inflation
WPI inflation registered sharp increases sequentially (average of 5.5 per cent) (Chart II.17a). Inflation in
between February and May 2021 to touch an all- petroleum products – especially petrol and diesel – eggs
time high of 13.1 per cent (as per the WPI series, and edible oils diverged considerably between the CPI

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart II.17: Alternative Measures of Inflation
a: Various Measures of Inflation (y-o-y) b: CPI-WPI Divergence: Select Commodities (Average
during March 2021 - August 2021)
Sources: NSO; Labour Bureau; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.
and the WPI (Chart II.17b). These developments have WPI inflation to the CPI and their long-run relationship
again brought to fore the possibility of transmission of (Box II.2).
Box II.2: CPI-WPI Inflation Post-Lockdown: Long-run Cointegration and Short-run Error Correction
Since the onset of the pandemic in 2020, consumer
Chart II.2.1: CPI WPI Inflation
price and wholesale price inflation rates have been
exhibiting considerable divergence, the wedge widening
to 6.1 percentage points in August 2021 (Chart II.2.1). This
brought to fore the concern – will elevated WPI inflation
feed into CPI?
Recent studies have shown that over time and through
the course of the pandemic the sensitivity of CPI inflation
to WPI inflation has come down (RBI, 2021).
An analysis based on CPI and WPI for the period,
April 2012-July 2021, shows that a long-run relationship
exists between CPI and WPI14. The speed of adjustment
is low.
Sources: NSO; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.
The CPI food index and the WPI food index are cointegrated
as well as homogeneous, i.e., they move one-on-one in cointegrated but the long run coefficient is less than one.
the long term. CPI core and WPI core are also found to be While WPI core largely comprises of basic and intermediate
(Contd.)
14 The long-run relationship between headline CPI and WPI inflation has been disrupted by the pandemic and it holds only after controlling for the
pandemic related disruptions.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Table II.2.1: Cointegration and VECM Estimates for CPI and WPI by Major Groups
Overall Food@ Fuel@ Core@
Johansen Cointegration Test Trace Statistic 33.00*** 26.74*** 2.74 30.83**
H: No Cointegrating Equation (p-value)# (0.005) (0.005) (0.97) (0.01)

Number of cointegrating vectors 1 1 0 1
Long-run equation Not Applicable
Homogeneity (0.000)*** (0.989) Not Applicable (0.000)***
H: Long run coefficient =1 (p-value)

Error correction term in short-run -0.083*** -0.089** Not Applicable -0.078***
Regression Diagnostics:
Adjusted R2 0.211 0.317 Not Applicable 0.430
Breusch-Godfrey LM Test (p-value) 0.213 0.238 Not Applicable 0.112
Conclusions Cointegrated; not Cointegrated; and Not Cointegrated Cointegrated; not
homogeneous homogeneous homogeneous
@ See notes for definitions.
# Maximum eigenvalue statistic gives similar results as Trace statistic.
*** denotes significance at 1 per cent level, ** denotes significance at 5 per cent level and * denotes significance at 10 per cent level.
Notes:
1. The sample period for the analysis is April 2012-July 2021. The estimates on cointegration and vector error correction models (VECMs) are based on Johansen
System Cointegration test. The homogeneity is tested using student’s t-test.
2. CPI food is defined as CPI food and beverages. WPI food comprises of WPI food articles, manufactured food products and non-alcoholic beverages.
3. CPI fuel comprises of CPI fuel and light, petrol and diesel. WPI fuel is defined as WPI fuel and power.
4. CPI core is defined as CPI excluding food, fuel, petrol, diesel and housing. WPI core is defined as WPI non-food manufactured products excluding non-alcoholic
beverages.
5. COVID-19 related disruptions have been adjusted for by introducing time dummies in the VECMs – a dummy for April 2020 has been included in all four
equations and additionally for May 2021 for the core equation. All dummies were found to be significant at 1 per cent level. WPI and CPI with appropriate lags
have been included in estimating the short-term error correction equations.
References:
industrial inputs that do not find representation in CPI, CPI
core comprises of household goods and services, including RBI (2021), “State of the Economy”, RBI Bulletin, June 2021.
housing service, that are not part of WPI (Das and George, Das, P., & George, A. T. (2017), “Comparison of Consumer
2017). WPI and CPI fuel groups, on the other hand, are not and Wholesale Prices Indices in India: An Analysis of
cointegrated (Table II.2.1). Properties and Sources of Divergence”, RBI Working Paper
Series, WPS (DEPR): 05 / 2017.
II.3 Costs The increase in farm input price inflation was largely
driven by double digit inflation in fodder, due to
During H1:2021, costs, as measured by inflation
damage to production from excess rains during
in WPI industrial raw materials and farm inputs,
September-October 2020, and HSD reflecting firming
increased (Chart II.18). The firming up of global
up of global crude oil prices. Fertiliser prices, on a
crude oil prices during 2021 impacted the prices of
year-on-year basis, edged up moderately during 2021,
inputs such as high-speed diesel (HSD), naphtha,
reflecting increase in international prices. Prices of
aviation turbine fuel (ATF), and furnace oil. Prices
of non-food articles also increased during March- electricity – a key input in both industrial and farm
August 2021. Prices of fibres and oilseeds edged up inputs – remained muted during H1:2021. Price
as international cotton and soybean prices increased. increase of agricultural machinery and implements,
However, inflation in industrial raw materials eased on a year-on-year basis, also stayed subdued, although
marginally in July 2021 reflecting easing in prices of a gradual pass-through of higher manufacturing costs
minerals, bitumen, paper and pulp, before picking due to rising commodity prices is underway during
up again in August 2021. March-August 2021.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
rates of the nominal rural wages eased sharply, on a
Chart II.18: Farm and Non-farm Input Costs (y-o-y)
year-on-year basis, during May-July 2021, attributable
to adverse base effects15 (Chart II.19).
Growth in the value of production in the organised
sector decelerated in contrast to the increase in staff
costs for listed firms in the manufacturing sector
during Q1:2021-22. In the services sector, staff cost
increased sharper than the value of production. As a
result, unit labour costs (measured as a ratio of staff
cost to value of production) rose from 5.7 per cent in
Q4:2020-21 to 6.2 per cent in Q1:2021-22 for firms
in the manufacturing sector16 and from 29.1 per cent
*: Comprise primary non-food articles, minerals, coal, aviation turbine fuel, high
speed diesel, naphtha, bitumen, furnace oil, lube oil, petroleum coke, electricity, to 31.5 per cent for firms in the services sector17
cotton yarn and paper and pulp from WPI.
$: Comprise high speed diesel, fodder, electricity, fertilisers, pesticides, and (Chart II.20).
agricultural and forestry machinery from WPI.
Sources: Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.
Input cost pressures and salary outgoes are expected
to rise in Q3:2021-22 for the manufacturing firms
Nominal rural wages for both agricultural and non- polled in the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook
agricultural labourers remained stagnant; growth survey. Manufacturers may pass on the cost burden
Chart II.19: Wage Growth (y-o-y) and Inflation in Rural Areas (y-o-y)
Sources: NSO; Labour Bureau; and RBI staff estimates.
15 Rural wages had increased sharply during May-June 2020 reflecting labour shortages during the nationwide lockdown period and the hike in wages by
`20 under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee (MGNREGA) scheme effective April 1, 2020.
16 Based on 1,647 manufacturing firms.
17 Based on 661 services firms.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
going forward. The firms expect these factors to push
Chart II.20: Labour Cost in Manufacturing and
up the selling prices in Q3 along with increase in
Services Staff Cost Per Unit Value of Production
salary outgoes (Chart II.21b).
An analysis of the composition of costs among
listed non-government non-financial (NGNF) firms18
reveals that there has been a distinct upward shift
in costs for all constituents since the pre-pandemic
period (Chart II.22).
Manufacturing firms included in the purchasing
managers’ index (PMI) also reported increase in
input prices, with the pace of increase picking up in
September 2021. PMI services firms reported elevated
input prices, mainly driven by fuel, raw materials and
Sources: Capitaline database; and RBI staff estimates.
transportation. In tandem, selling prices also started
and selling prices are expected to increase in Q3 to tick up, though the pace remained muted. One
(Chart II.21a). year ahead business inflation expectations polled by
The firms covered in the Reserve Bank’s services and the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad,
infrastructure outlook survey also expect input cost rose to their highest reading in July before softening
pressures as also the cost of finance to harden further somewhat in August.19
Chart II.21: Expectations of Cost Condition
a: Manufacturing Firms’ Cost (expectation) b: Services Firms’ Cost (Expectations)
Sources: Reserve Bank's Industrial Outlook Survey; Reserve Bank's Services and Infrastructure Outlook Survey; and RBI staff estimates.
18 Based on the abridged quarterly financial results of common companies.
19 The monthly Business Inflation Expectations Survey (BIES) of the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad, polls a panel of around 1200 business
leaders primarily from the manufacturing sector about their inflation expectations in the short and medium term. The latest survey pertains to July 2021.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
may be shifting downwards in contrast to initial
Chart II.22: Cost of Manufacturing Firms
expectations. Active supply-side interventions
by the Government in food items, particularly
in pulses and edible oils, should bring about a
better balance between supply and demand. With cost
pressures showing no sign of abating, core inflation
remains sticky and elevated. Furthermore, shortage
of key industrial components due to stretched global
supply chains and logistics is also leading to cost
escalation. As demand recovery gathers steam, there
is a rising risk of higher input price pass-through to
output prices. Measures to ameliorate supply-side
cost pressures would be critical at this juncture,
especially in terms of a calibrated reduction of the
Sources: Capitaline database; and RBI staff estimates. indirect taxes on petrol and diesel. This would help
anchor inflation expectations, prevent build-up of
II.4 Conclusion
a wage-price nexus and provide space for monetary
With inflation expected to moderate in near policy to sustain support for the still incomplete
months, the outlook has improved, and its trajectory growth recovery.

Chapter III Demand and Output
III. Demand and Output
While the second wave dented the momentum of economic activity in Q1:2021-22, its impact on aggregate
demand was muted relative to the first wave. Aggregate demand recovered in Q2:2021-22 and is expected to
strengthen further in H2. The supply side is gradually normalising with the easing of supply chain and logistic
disruptions. The recovery, however, remains dependent upon continued policy support, the COVID-19 trajectory
and the progress of vaccination.
Within days of the release of April 2021 MPR, the was muted and short-lived relative to the first
second wave of COVID-19 intensified and became wave. More nuanced and calibrated containment
virulent and lethal, overwhelming the health measures and adaptation by businesses and
infrastructure and denting the momentum of households to working in a pandemic environment
economic activity in Q1:2021-22. The second wave also moderated the headwinds from the second
receded as rapidly as it had surged (Chart III.1). wave. Aggregate demand recovered further in Q2:2021-
Accordingly, the impact on aggregate demand 22, led by investment and private consumption.
Chart III.1: COVID Infections and Vaccination
a: New Cases b: Fatalities and Recovery Rate
(7-day moving average) (7-day moving average)
c: Daily Vaccinations d: Cumulative Vaccination Status
(7-day moving average) (month-end)
Source: Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoH&FW).

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Table III.1: Real GDP Growth
(y-o-y per cent)
Item 2019-20 2020-21 Weighted 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
(FRE) (PE) contribution*
2019-20 2020-21 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
PFCE 5.5 -9.1 3.1 -5.2 7.6 6.5 6.4 2.0 -26.2 -11.2 -2.8 2.7 19.3
(-11.9)
GFCE 7.9 2.9 0.8 0.3 1.8 9.6 8.9 12.1 12.7 -23.5 -1.0 28.3 -4.8
(7.4)
GFCF 5.4 -10.8 1.7 -3.5 13.3 3.9 2.4 2.5 -46.6 -8.6 2.6 10.9 55.3
(-17.1)
Exports -3.3 -4.7 -0.7 -0.9 3.0 -1.3 -5.4 -8.8 -21.8 -2.0 -3.5 8.8 39.1
(8.7)
Imports -0.8 -13.6 -0.2 -3.1 9.4 -1.7 -7.5 -2.7 -40.9 -17.9 -5.0 12.3 60.2
(-5.3)
GDP at market prices 4.0 -7.3 4.0 -7.3 5.4 4.6 3.3 3.0 -24.4 -7.4 0.5 1.6 20.1
(-9.2)
Note: *: Component-wise contributions to growth do not add up to GDP growth because change in stocks, valuables and discrepancies are not included.
Figures in parentheses are growth rates over Q1:2019-20.
FRE: First revised estimates, PE: Provisional estimate
Source: National Statistical Office (NSO).
The recovery is benefitting from pent-up demand sowing. A number of high-frequency indicators are
supported by the increasing vaccination coverage, yet to exceed the pre-COVID levels, however, and the
the government’s push towards capital expenditure, recovery remains dependent upon continued policy
robust external demand and normal monsoon. The support.
ongoing demand revival is expected to get a further
III.1 Aggregate Demand
boost from the government’s asset monetisation
programme and reforms encompassing the telecom Despite a loss of momentum in the wake of the
and banking sectors. The supply side is also gradually severe second wave, real gross domestic product
normalising with the easing of supply chain and (GDP) rose by 20.1 per cent year-on-year (y-o-y)
logistic disruptions. Agriculture and allied activities in Q1:2021-22 on a large favourable base effect
remain resilient, backed by above normal kharif (Table III.1 and Chart III.2a), supported by expansion
Chart III.2: GDP Growth and its Constituents
a. Weighted Contribution of the Components t o b: GDP Growth and Momentum
GDP Growth
Note: SAAR – Seasonally adjusted annualised rate.
Sources: NSO and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter III Demand and Output
in all its constituents except for government final baseline growth path. The decline in the government
consumption expenditure (GFCE) which contracted. consumption expenditure also contributed to actual
The level of GDP in Q1:2021-22 was, however, still 9.2 GDP growth trailing projections.
per cent below the pre-pandemic (Q1:2019-20) level.
III.1.1 Private Final Consumption Expenditure
Excluding GFCE, real GDP expanded by 25.0 per cent
Private consumption, with a share of around 55 per cent
(y-o-y) during Q1. Momentum – the quarter-on-quarter
in GDP during Q1:2021-22, continued as the mainstay
(q-o-q) seasonally adjusted annualised rate (SAAR) of
of aggregate demand. Notwithstanding a y-o-y growth
real GDP – fell during Q1:2021-22, however, reflecting
of 19.3 per cent, it was around 12 per cent lower than
the lockdowns/restrictions during the second wave,
its pre-COVID level (Q1:2019-20). The accelerated pace
although the contraction was lower than a year ago
of vaccination and the plateauing of new infections
with businesses and households adapting better to
are facilitating faster resumption of contact-intensive
COVID-19 protocols as well as the sharp tapering in
services and giving a fillip to private consumption.
infections (Chart III.2b). Aggregate demand gained
Urban demand is turning the corner as corroborated by
momentum in Q2, supported by recovery in private
high frequency coincident and leading indicators for
consumption and investment demand.
Q2. Passenger vehicle sales in July and August crossed
GDP Projections versus Actual Outcomes
pre-COVID levels (Chart III.4a), but production is
Actual real GDP growth of 20.1 per cent in Q1 facing headwinds from the persistence of global supply
undershot the April 2021 MPR projection of 26.2 per bottlenecks in the availability of semiconductor chips.
cent (Chart III.3), largely reflecting the impact of the Domestic air passenger traffic and the production of
steep jump in infections due to the second wave. consumer durables regained traction during July and
The April MPR had alluded to the potential surge in August, albeit they are still below pre-COVID levels
infections and new mutants as downside risks to the (Chart III.4b and c). Household credit is gradually
improving, driven by credit card transactions and
Chart III.3: GDP Growth: Projection versus Actual personal loan, supporting consumer durables
(Q1: 2021-22) financing (Chart III.4d). Digital retail payments data,
which provide useful signals of economic activity,
corroborate the upturn (Box III.1).
Rural consumption demand, which was largely
immune to the pandemic during the first wave, was
dented during the second wave with the fast spread
of infections to rural areas. With the abatement of
the second wave and improving vaccinations, rural
consumption exhibited recovery in Q2, backed
by buoyant rabi harvest, good kharif prospects,
government transfers and the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MNREGA)
programme. The pick-up in motorcycle sales during
June-August and the improvement in consumer
Sources: NSO and RBI staff estimates. non-durables underscore this revival (Chart III.5).

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart III.4: Urban Demand: High Frequency Indicators
a: Passenger Vehicle Sales b: Domestic Air Passenger Traffic
c: Consumer Durables d: Household Credit
Sources: Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM); NSO; and RBI.
Tractor sales have exhibited robust growth, remaining 2019 levels, although trailing the exceptionally strong
above their pre-pandemic levels, although sales dipped growth of last year.
in August in the usual seasonal pattern. Fertiliser Unemployment rose and labour force participation
sales picked up from May, moving in tandem with fell in Q1:2021-22 under the pressure of the second
Box III.I: Tracking Macroeconomic Activity using Digital Payments Data
A robust assessment of the current state of the economy macroeconomic forecasting tools to nowcast economic
and its expected trajectory is critical for the effectiveness activity has become widespread. In this regard, payments
of a forward-looking monetary policy. Data on GDP – data represent a unique source of tracing the underlying
the comprehensive measure of economic activity – are economic activity, given their crucial role in undertaking
however, available, with a lag of two months after the end and settling transactions in a market economy. Cross-
of the reference quarter. Given these data lags and the large country empirical evidence suggests that the payments
and swift exogenous shocks that have been witnessed in data enhance the accuracy of the nowcasts and short-term
the recent years (such as the 2008 global financial crisis forecasts relative to other indicators (Aprigliano et. al.,
and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic), the interest in new 2019; Bentsen et. al., 2021).
(Contd.)

Chapter III Demand and Output
India has state-of-the-art payments infrastructure and
Chart III.I.1: Economic Activity Forecasts
products and there is a wider adoption of digital payments
and Payments Data
(Das, 2021). The share of digital transactions in the total
volume of non-cash retail payments stood at 98.5 per
cent during 2020-21. The width and the depth of the
banking system, the enhanced policy focus on promoting
digital payments and the relatively quick availability of
such data make them valuable for nowcasting GDP in
the Indian context. A preliminary analysis shows that,
amongst the various modes of digital retail payments,
the volume of transactions through the following three
channels – ATMs, credit cards and debit cards – has a Notes: Model 1: digital payments only; Model 2: digital payments plus
petroleum consumption, electricity consumption and railway freight traffic;
high correlation with GDP (0.95 for the period Q1:2011- Model 3: Petroleum consumption, electricity consumption and railway
freight traffic; AR(1): Autoregressive model (first-order).
12 to Q4:2020-21). The dynamics are further explored Source: RBI staff estimates.
through alternate autoregressive distributed lag (ARDL)
model specifications with the following variables: real
data (Model 1) outperform the specification which does
GDP, digital payments volumes (as defined above), and
not include payments data (Model 3) and also upon the
select real economy indicators having a strong association
benchmark AR(1) model (Chart III.1.1). Payments data
with output (namely, petroleum consumption, electricity
thus add value to the forecasting toolkit and mixed
consumption and railway freight traffic) as control
frequency modelling approaches can provide monthly
variables1.
updates of the evolving output dynamics. The fast pace
To assess the role of the payments data relative to
of the innovations in the payments technology and the
the competing variables, three model specifications rapid shifts in the payments habits of economic agents
are attempted. Model 1 includes data only on digital need ongoing refinements in the modelling approaches.
payments; Model 2 augments payments data with the
References:
control variables; Model 3 drops the payments data
Aprigliano, V., G. Ardizzi and L. Monteforte (2019), “Using
and includes only the three control variables. Given
Payment System Data to Forecast Economic Activity”,
the large disruptions to the economic activity from the
International Journal of Central Banking, 15(4), 55-80.
unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic and to evaluate the
relative forecasting performance, the models are estimated Bentsen, K.N., D. Gorea (2021), “Nowcasting and
initially for the pre-COVID period (Q2:2011-12 to Q3:2019- Forecasting Economic Activity in Denmark using Payment
20) and subsequently for the sample including the COVID System Data”, Denmark Nationalbank Working Paper.
period (Q2:2011-12 to Q4:2020-21). The estimates indicate Das, Shaktikanta (2021). Financial Inclusion – Past,
that the forecasts of the baseline model with payments Present and Future, RBI Bulletin, August.
1 Unit root tests suggest that all variables are non-stationary (I(1)). Bounds test (F-statistics) confirm cointegration for all the specifications at 5 per
cent significance level. Data are in log terms and adjusted for seasonality; the variable lags are based on the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) and the
regression diagnostics are satisfied.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart III.5: Rural Demand: High Frequency Indicators
a: Tractor Sales b: Motorcycle Sales
c: Consumer Non-durables d: Fertiliser Sales
Sources: Tractor Manufactures Association; Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM); NSO; and Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers.
wave, but the impact was muted compared to the also shown strong recovery recently, according to
first wave. According to the Centre for Monitoring Naukri Jobspeak data.
Indian Economy (CMIE), there was a deep hit to
III.1.2 Gross Fixed Capital Formation
labour markets in mid-May at the peak of the second
Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) expanded by
wave. Employment recovered swiftly in June-July
55.3 per cent (y-o-y) in Q1 (contraction of 46.6 per
and strengthened in September (Chart III.6a). In
cent a year ago). Sequentially, there was a dip of 23.6
September, labour participation further rose with
per cent in Q1 despite robust government capex.
the phased opening up of the economy leading to
The share of GFCF in aggregate demand inched up
rising demand for labour. Employment conditions
to 31.6 per cent in Q1 from 24.4 per cent a year ago
improved in June and July 2021 in the organised
but remained lower than its pre-pandemic level.
sector, according to payrolls data (Chart III.6b). Construction activity, a large portion of GFCF, was
Increase in hirings is led by the IT sector, while subdued due to pandemic effects, especially led by
non-IT sectors such as education, banking, financial, labour and materials shortages, although the impact
insurance, hospitality and automobile sector have was less than during the first wave. There are signs of

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.6: Employment Situation in India
a: Unemployment and Labor Participation Rates b: Net Payroll Additions based on EPFO Records
Sources: CMIE; and Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO).
revival in investment demand in Q2, as suggested by goods imports; production of capital goods; and
the movements in the proximate indictors – capital cement production (Charts III.7).
Chart III.7: Indicators of Investment Demand
a: Import of Capital Goods b: IIP Capital Goods
c: Finished Steel Consumption d: Cement Production
Sources: DGCI&S; NSO; Joint Plant Committee; and Office of Economic Adviser.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Capacity utilisation (CU) in the manufacturing sector
Chart III.9: Interest Coverage Ratio in
dropped to 60.0 per cent in Q1:2021-22 from 69.4
Manufacturing and Services Firms
per cent in the previous quarter (Chart III.8). On a
seasonally adjusted basis, CU fell from 66.7 per cent
in Q4 to 61.7 per cent in Q1.
The interest coverage ratio (ICR)2 of listed non-
financial private companies in the manufacturing and
information technology (IT) sectors improved further
in Q1:2021-22, indicating improved debt servicing
capacity and hence, conducive conditions for the
expansion in investment activity (Chart III.9).
The production-linked incentive (PLI) scheme is
nurturing private investment. The mega schemes,
Note: Data for Q1:2021-22 are based on results of 1,647 listed private
manufacturing companies and 661 listed private non-finacial services
viz. National Infrastructure Plan (NIP) amounting to
companies.
`100 lakh crore and National Monetisation Pipeline Source: RBI staff estimates.
(NMP) involving `6 lakh crore (Chart III.10), are also
expected to give a major thrust to infrastructure and by leveraging further public investments. The
spending and uplift potential output. The NMP, central government’s financial assistance to the
which will be co-terminus with the balance NIP state governments for infrastructure spending and
period (2021-22 to 2024-2025), is expected to unlock incentives for disinvestment/monetisation in the
the value of investments in brownfield public sector form of additional allocation equivalent to 33 per
assets by tapping institutional and long-term capital cent of value of the monetised assets, subject to the
Chart III.8: Capacity Utilisation in Manufacturing Chart III.10: National Monetisation Pipeline
Sources: Ministry of Finance and Press Information Bureau (PIB), Government
Source: RBI. of India.
2 Interest coverage ratio is the ratio of earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) to interest expenses and measures a company’s capacity to make interest
payments on its debt.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Table III.2: Budgetary Position of the Central Government
Item (` thousand crore) (Per cent)
Budget estimates Actuals Per cent to BE Growth rate
2020-21 2021-22 Apr-Aug 2020 Apr-Aug 2021 Apr-Aug 2020 Apr-Aug 2021 Apr-Aug 2020 Apr-Aug 2021
1. Revenue receipts 2,020.9 1,788.4 370.6 793.5 18.3 44.4 -38.6 114.1
2. Tax revenue (Net) 1,635.9 1,545.4 284.5 644.8 17.4 41.7 -29.7 126.7
3. Non-tax revenue 385.0 243.0 86.1 148.7 22.4 61.2 -56.6 72.6
4. Non-debt capital receipts 225.0 188.0 6.7 15.2 3.0 8.1 -63.5 127.8
5. Total receipts (1+4) 2,245.9 1,976.4 377.3 808.7 16.8 40.9 -39.3 114.3
6. Total expenditure (7+8) 3,042.2 3,483.2 1,247.7 1,276.7 41.0 36.7 6.2 2.3
7. Revenue expenditure 2,630.1 2,929.0 1,113.2 1,104.8 42.3 37.7 7.1 -0.8
8. Capital expenditure 412.1 554.2 134.4 171.9 32.6 31.0 -1.3 27.8
9. Revenue deficit (7-1) 609.2 1,140.6 742.6 311.3 121.9 27.3 70.3 -58.1
10. Gross fiscal deficit (6-5) 796.3 1,506.8 870.3 468.0 109.3 31.1 57.1 -46.2
11. Gross primary deficit 88.1 697.1 632.7 189.6 717.9 27.2 89.0 -70.0
Source: Controller General of Accounts (CGA).
realised amount being used for capital expenditure, were lower than past trends (Table III.2). Though
should also provide an impetus to capital expenditure. the first supplementary demands for grants for
2021-22 presented in July involved gross additional
III.1.3 Government Expenditure
expenditure of `1,87,202 crore, the net cash outgo
Government final consumption expenditure (GFCE)
amounts to only `23,675 crore or 0.12 per cent of GDP.
contracted by 4.8 per cent in Q1:2021-22, partly due
to the base effect. Revenues – both tax and non-tax The buoyancy in the central government’s tax
– remained robust. The fiscal position of the central revenue during April-August 2021 was driven
government accordingly strengthened during April- by higher corporate taxes (on the back of strong
August 2021 and the gross fiscal deficit (GFD) and corporate performance) and customs duties (due to
the revenue deficit (RD) at 31.1 per cent and 27.3 higher import demand and improving trade activity)
per cent of the budget estimate (BE), respectively, (Table III.3). Excise duty collections benefitted from
Table III.3: Central Government’s Tax Collections
Item ` thousand crore Per cent
Budget Estimates Actuals Per cent to BE Growth Rate
2020-21 2021-22 Apr-Aug 2020 Apr-Aug 2021 Apr-Aug 2020 Apr-Aug 2021 Apr-Aug 2020 Apr-Aug 2021
A. Direct taxes 1,319.0 1,108.0 187.3 376.2 14.2 34.0 -33.3 108.0
Of which
1. Corporation tax 681.0 547.0 64.7 168.1 9.5 30.7 -41.8 159.7
2. Income tax 625.0 548.5 117.7 199.4 18.8 36.4 -28.9 69.3
B. Indirect Taxes 1,104.0 1,109.1 316.9 483.4 28.7 43.6 -16.6 52.6
Of which
1. Total GST 693.5 633.3 182.4 266.9 26.3 42.1 -23.9 46.3
2. Custom duties 138.0 136.0 32.3 76.2 23.4 56.0 -47.9 136.0
3. Union excise duties 267.0 335.0 100.4 137.2 37.6 41.0 32.0 36.7
C. Gross tax revenue 2,423.0 2,217.1 504.2 859.6 20.8 38.8 -23.7 70.5
D. Assignment to States/UTs 784.2 665.6 218.0 212.6 27.8 31.9 -14.7 -2.5
E. Net tax revenue 1,635.9 1,545.4 284.5 644.8 17.4 41.7 -29.7 126.7
Sources: Union Budget Documents and Controller General of Accounts.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart III.11: GST Collections Chart III.12: States' Fiscal Indicators during
April-July
Sources: CGA and PIB. Source: Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
higher global crude oil prices. Goods and services crore people under the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan
tax (GST) collections received a jolt from the second Anna Yojana to mitigate the impact of COVID-19. The
wave during May and June but recovered rapidly in central government’s capital expenditure increased
the subsequent period (Chart III.11). Overall, direct by 27.8 per cent y-o-y during April-August 2021 (and
taxes rose by 101.4 per cent y-o-y (32.8 per cent over 26.2 per cent over pre-COVID level), driven by outlays
the corresponding period of 2019-20), while indirect towards road transport and highways.
taxes surged by 52.5 per cent (27.2 per cent over the
Available information for 18 states indicates that
corresponding period of 2019-20). Non-tax revenue
their GFD in April-July 2021 (as per cent to full year
also registered healthy growth, boosted by higher
budget estimates) was lower than a year ago on the
surplus transfer by the Reserve Bank.
back of a surge in revenue receipts led by own tax
On the expenditure side, revenue expenditure and non-tax revenues, even as transfers from the
contracted marginally by 0.8 per cent y-o-y during Centre contracted (Chart III.12).3 Subsequent to
April-August 2021 (although higher by 6.3 per cent the 43rd meeting of the GST Council, it was decided
over the pre-pandemic level), partly due to the that the Centre would borrow `1.59 lakh crore from
frontloading of expenditures a year ago necessitated the market through a special window for 2021-22,
by the first wave of the pandemic and also efforts which would be passed on to states as back to back
to curtail avoidable spending. Spending on major loans; of this, an amount of `75,000 crore has been
subsidies, however, increased by 12.8 per cent y-o-y transferred to states. Furthermore, `81,179 crore of
(lower by 22.2 per cent compared to the same period the GST compensation overdues of the last year are
of 2019-20), with the extension of the schemes put in also expected to be transferred this year. Both revenue
place last year to provide free ration to more than 80 and capital expenditure of the states picked up during
3 Following the deterioration in key fiscal indicators in 2020-21, 27 states budgeted a lower consolidated GFD at 3.4 per cent of GDP for 2021-22, driven
by higher revenues.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Table III.4: Government Market Borrowings
(` crore)
Item 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 (up to end-September)
Centre States Total Centre States Total Centre States Total
Net borrowings 4,73,972 4,87,454 9,61,426 11,43,114 6,51,777 17,94,891 5,63,100 2,35,741 7,98,841
Gross borrowings 7,10,000 6,34,521 13,44,521 13,70,324 7,98,816 21,69,140 7,02,357 3,08,972 10,11,329
Sources: Government of India; and RBI staff estimates.
April-July 2021 – the latter expanded sharply by 99 per III.1.4 External Demand
cent, more than offsetting the contraction of 45 per
Buoyed by strong external demand and base effects,
cent a year ago.
exports registered a sharp expansion in Q1:2021-
The Union Budget 2021-22 projected gross and net 22 and the buoyancy continued to Q2 (Chart III.13).
market borrowings at `12.05 lakh crore and `9.24 Merchandise imports also rebounded strongly on the
lakh crore, respectively. The centre’s gross issuances back of the recovery in domestic demand, higher crude
of market borrowings during the first half were `7.02 oil prices and base effects. With the growth of imports
lakh crore (58.3 per cent of the full year budgeted outpacing that of exports, net exports contributed
amount) as against `7.24 lakh crore envisaged in the negatively to aggregate demand in Q1:2021-22 [(-)1.9
calendar for H1 (Table III.4). The weighted average per cent in Q1 as compared with 1.3 per cent a year
cost and maturity of issuances during H1:2021-22 ago and (-) 4.8 per cent two years ago (pre-COVID)].
were 6.19 per cent and 16.7 years, respectively (5.8
The surge in merchandise exports was powered
per cent and 14.8 years in the same period of 2020-21).
by engineering goods, petroleum products, organic
For H2:2021-22, the centre’s gross market borrowings
and inorganic chemicals, cotton textiles and drugs
have been planned `5.03 lakh crore in line with the
and pharmaceuticals. Labour-intensive sectors like
full year budget estimates. Against the backdrop of
comfortable cash position, the Central Government
has not planned additional market borrowing for Chart III.13: Merchandise Trade
making payment to the state governments for GST
compensation. States raised gross market borrowings
of `3.09 lakh crore during H1:2021-22, 83.4 per cent of
the indicative calendar.
The ways and means advances (WMA) limit for the
Central Government for H1:2021-22 was scaled back
to `1.2 lakh crore from `2 lakh crore in H1:2020-21;
for H2:2021-22, it has been fixed at `0.5 lakh core
as compared with `1.25 lakh core a year ago. For
states/union territories, the Reserve Bank decided to
continue with the enhanced interim WMA limit of
`51,560 crore during the first half of 2021-22 to help
them in tiding over the short-term mismatches and
Source: DGCI&S.
difficulties faced due to the pandemic.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart III.14: Exports Growth
a: Exports Growth Relative Contribution b: Major Drivers of Exports in April-August 2021:
Relative Contribution
Sources: DGCI&S and CPB, Netherlands.
apparels, leather products and tea continue to lag, restrictions (Chart III.15). The trade deficit widened
mainly due to their greater sensitivity to mobility to US$ 55.5 billion in April-August 2021 from US$
restrictions (Chart III.14). Going forward, the schemes 23.4 billion a year ago, but it remained below its pre-
such as District as Export Hub (DEH) covering One COVID level (US$ 77.2 billion).
District One Product (ODOP), PLI scheme for sunrise
Services exports growth in Q1: 2021-22 was the
sectors and Ubharte-Sitaare scheme for MSMEs should
highest in 13 quarters and surpassed pre-pandemic
improve export competitiveness and help to achieve
levels (Chart III.16). This strong growth in the overall
the target of US$ 400 billion set for 2021-22. The
services exports was driven by software, business,
persistent upsurge in global container freight prices
and transportation services. Major information
and the growing shortage of semi-conductors, however,
technology (IT) companies continued to benefit
pose downside risks to a durable merchandise trade
from pandemic-induced demand from international
recovery (see Chapter V).
customers and adoption of new models. They
The impact of the second wave on import demand
recorded solid revenue growth in Q1:2021-22, driven
remained limited as compared to the first wave,
by banking, financial services including insurance,
reflecting calibrated and localised restrictions and
communications, healthcare and technology services.
businesses adapting to COVID-appropriate working
As a result, resilient services surplus had a favourable
environment. In Q2, with the gradual unwinding
impact on the current account balance in Q1:2021-22.
of restrictions, merchandise imports spurted and
During Q2 (July-August 2021), double-digit growth in
exceeded pre-COVID levels. Non-oil non-gold imports
services exports was driven by software, business and
were led by higher shipments of pearls and precious
transport services.
stones, vegetable oils, chemicals and chemical
products. Gold imports, after dropping sharply in May Turning to the financial account, capital flows
and June on the back of subdued demand due to the remained healthy during Q1:2021-22, primarily due
second wave, revived in Q2 with the relaxations of the to foreign direct investment (FDI), which was driven

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.15: Imports Growth
a: Imports Growth Relative Contribution b: Major Drivers of Imports in April-August 2021:
Relative Contribution
Source: DGCI&S.
by a few big deals in the manufacturing and digital macroeconomic indicators. Accretions to non-
sectors (Chart III.17). Net FDI at US$ 14.1 billion in resident deposits moderated during April-July 2021
April-July 2021 was higher than a year ago. While as compared with a year ago. As on October 1, 2021,
foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) adopted a cautious India’s foreign exchange reserves stood at US$ 637.5
stance during the second wave of COVID-19, billion, equivalent to 14 months of imports projected
they turned net buyers from August 2021 amidst for 2021-22 and 111.6 per cent of outstanding
robust Q1 corporate earnings and better domestic external debt at end-June 2021.
Chart III.16: Services Trade Chart III.17: Net Foreign Direct and
Portfolio Investment
Notes: *: Net FDI data pertains to July 2021.
Sources: National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL) and RBI.
Source: RBI.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Table III.5: Sector-wise Growth in GVA
(y-o-y growth)
Sector 2019-20 2020-21 Weighted 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
(FRE) (PE) contribution
2019-20 2020-21 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 4.3 3.6 0.6 0.5 3.3 3.5 3.4 6.8 3.5 3.0 4.5 3.1 4.5 (8.2)
Industry -2.0 -6.4 -0.5 -1.4 1.0 -2.7 -3.0 -3.2 -31.0 -1.6 1.6 5.5 40.4 (-3.1)
Mining and quarrying -2.5 -8.5 -0.1 -0.2 -1.3 -5.2 -3.5 -0.9 -17.2 -6.5 -4.4 -5.7 18.6 (-1.8)
Manufacturing -2.4 -7.2 -0.4 -1.2 0.6 -3.0 -2.9 -4.2 -36.0 -1.5 1.7 6.9 49.6 (-4.2)
Electricity, gas, water supply and other utilities 2.1 1.9 0.0 0.0 6.9 1.7 -3.1 2.6 -9.9 2.3 7.3 9.1 14.3 (3.0)
Services 6.4 -8.4 4.0 -5.3 6.8 7.3 5.8 5.6 -24.9 -11.0 -0.2 3.2 16.1 (-12.8)
Construction 1.0 -8.6 0.1 -0.7 3.7 1.0 -1.3 0.7 -49.5 -7.2 6.5 14.5 68.3 (-14.9)
Trade, hotels, transport, communication 6.4 -18.2 1.3 -3.7 6.2 6.8 7.0 5.7 -48.1 -16.1 -7.9 -2.3 34.3 (-30.2)
Financial, real estate and professional services 7.3 -1.5 1.6 -0.3 8.8 8.9 5.5 4.9 -5.0 -9.1 6.7 5.4 3.7 (-1.5)
Public administration, defence and other services 8.3 -4.6 1.1 -0.6 5.6 8.8 8.9 9.6 -10.2 -9.2 -2.2 2.3 5.8 (-5.0)
GVA at basic prices 4.1 -6.2 4.1 -6.2 5.0 4.6 3.4 3.7 -22.4 -7.3 1.0 3.7 18.8 (-7.8)
Note: FRE: First revised estimates; PE: Provisional estimates.
Figures in parenthesis are growth rates over Q1:2019-20.
Source: NSO.
III.2 Aggregate Supply to mid-July and almost the whole of August), after
a normal start. With the strong revival of rains in
Real gross value added (GVA) at basic prices rose by
September, the cumulative seasonal rainfall was 0.7
18.8 per cent y-o-y during Q1:2021-22 as against a
contraction of 22.4 per cent in Q1:2020-21 (Table
Table III.6: Agriculture Production
III.5). The resilience of agriculture and the recovery
in manufacturing and non-contact intensive Item Lakh tonnes Growth (%)
2019-20 2020-21 2020-21
services supported the expansion in GVA, while
over final
contact-intensive services lagged due to logistic and estimate
2019-20
operational constraints. Real GVA was, however, 7.8
I. Total foodgrains 2,975.0 3,086.5 3.7
per cent below its pre-pandemic (Q1:2019-20) level.
Rice 1,188.7 1,222.7 2.9
Wheat 1,078.6 1,095.2 1.5
III.2.1 Agriculture
Coarse cereals 477.5 511.5 7.1
Pulses 230.3 257.2 11.7
Agriculture and allied activities registered robust
II. Commercial crops
growth in Q1:2021-22 on the back of record rabi
Sugarcane 3,705.0 3,992.5 7.8
and horticulture production and resilience in allied Cotton 360.7 353.8 -1.9
Oilseeds 332.2 361.0 8.7
activities. Foodgrains production rose by 3.7 per cent
III. Total horticulture crops 3,204.7 3,298.6 2.9
in 2020-21, led by rice and wheat (Table III.6). The III.1 Total fruits 1,020.8 1,027.6 0.7
production of nine major oilseeds increased by 8.7 Banana 326.0 338.3 3.8
Citrus 145.7 140.7 -3.4
per cent, supported by the implementation of area
Mango 203.2 208.9 2.8
expansion policies under the National Food Security III.2 Total vegetables 1,882.8 1,962.7 4.2
Onion 260.9 269.2 3.2
Mission for edible oils. Horticulture production rose
Potato 485.6 536.9 10.6
by 2.9 per cent during 2020-21, led by an increase of
Tomato 205.5 210.0 2.2
2.8 per cent in the area under cultivation. III.3 Plantation crops 161.2 166.0 3.0
III.4 Total spices 101.4 105.4 3.9
In 2021, the south-west monsoon rainfall encountered III.5 Flowers and aromatics 37.3 35.7 -4.3
two slowdown phases (from the third week of June Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (MOAFW).

Chapter III Demand and Output
per cent below the long period average (LPA), with a year ago, and 4.1 per cent higher than the normal
83 per cent of the sub-divisions receiving normal sown area (5-year average) (Chart III.18d). Higher
or above normal rainfall (Charts III.18a and b). The minimum support prices (MSPs) – with increases of
production weighted rainfall (PRN) index at 102 1.1 per cent to 6.6 per cent over the previous year for
per cent (as on September 30) was below last year’s kharif 2021-22 with assured return of at least 50 per
position (105 per cent) and the PRN for rice, coarse cent over the cost of production (as measured by A2
cereals and sugarcane exceeded the 5-year average. As plus FL) – supported sowing activity. According to the
on September 30, 2021, reservoir levels stood at 80
first advance estimates for 2021-22, the production of
per cent of the full reservoir level (FRL), higher than
kharif foodgrains rose by 0.6 per cent over last year
the decadal average of 77 per cent – brightening the
(Table III.7). The Government of India had set the
prospects for the ensuing rabi season (Chart III.18 c).
target for foodgrains production for the year at 3,070
Despite the breaks in the monsoon’s progress, kharif lakh tonnes in the National Kharif Strategy for 2021-
sowing progressed well. As on September 30, 2021 22 which, inter alia, aims to attain self-sufficiency in
it was 0.2 per cent above the record sowing acreage the production of pulses and oilseeds.
Chart III.18: Progress of Rainfall and Kharif Sowing
a: Cumulative Weekly Progress of South-west Rainfall b: Comparative Rainfall Position
c: Reservoir Level d: Kharif Sowing Progress
Sources: India Meteorological Department (IMD), Central Water Commission, and Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare, Government of India.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
III.2.2 Industry
Table III.7: Kharif Crops Production 2021-22
(Lakh tonnes)
Industrial GVA posted y-o-y growth of 40.4 per cent
Item 2020-21 2021-22 2021-22
in Q1:2021-22, aided by a favourable base effect
First Fourth First Growth (per cent)
(31.0 per cent contraction last year). On a sequential
AE AE AE
Over Over
1st AE 4th AE basis, industrial output contracted by 11.8 per cent in
2020-21 2020-21
Q1, reflecting the loss of momentum in the face of
1. Foodgrains 1,445.2 1,495.6 1,505.0 4.1 0.6
the second wave. Industrial GVA trailed 3.1 per cent
Rice 1,023.6 1,044.1 1,070.4 4.6 2.5
below its pre-pandemic level (Q1:2019-20); while
Coarse Cereals 328.4 364.6 340.0 3.5 -6.7
Pulses 93.1 86.9 94.5 1.5 8.7 mining and manufacturing remained below Q1:2019-
Tur 40.4 42.8 44.3 9.7 3.5
20 levels, electricity, gas, water supply and other
Urad 21.5 16.0 20.5 -4.7 28.1
services exceeded Q1:2019-20 levels by 3.0 per cent
Moong 20.9 20.1 20.5 -1.9 2.0
2. Oilseeds (total) 257.3 240.3 233.9 -9.1 -2.7 (Chart III.19).
Groundnut 95.4 85.6 82.5 -13.4 -3.5
The index of industrial production (IIP) rose by 44.7
Soyabean 135.8 129.0 127.2 -6.4 -1.4
3. Cotton # 371.2 353.8 362.2 -2.4 2.4 per cent y-o-y during Q1:2021-22 on a negative base but
4. Jute & Mesta ## 96.6 95.6 96.1 -0.5 0.5 remained 6.7 per cent below its level two years back.
5. Sugarcane 3998.3 3992.5 4192.5 4.9 5.0
In Q2, the IIP expanded by 11.5 per cent y-o-y in July
#: Lakh bales of 170 kgs each.
2021, although it trailed marginally the pre-pandemic
# #: Lakh bales of 180 kgs each.
Source: MOAFW. levels (July 2019). Sequentially, the IIP expanded in
June-July after moderating in April and May. In terms
Improved rural prospects from kharif sowing are
of the use-based classification, all sectors except for
mirrored in high frequency indicators, viz., sales of
consumer durables exceeded 2019-20 levels by July
tractors and two-wheelers (Table III.8). Exports of
(Chart III.20). Manufacturing activity dipped in May
agriculture and allied products also expanded.
Chart III.19: Weighted Contribution to Industrial
GVA Growth
Table III.8: Rural Economy - High Frequency
Indicators
Items Unit April- April- April-
Aug Aug Aug
2019 2020 2021
Tractor sales Number (in lakh) 2.7 2.9 3.5
Two-wheeler sales Number (in lakh) 80.4 41.3 49.9
Fertiliser sales Lakh tonnes 212.2 253.6 221.7
Demand for employment Crore households 10.4 15.2 14.7
(MGNREGA)
Agriculture and allied sector USD billion 11.8 11.3 15.4
exports*
Agriculture credit growth* y-o-y 7.3 4.8 11.3
Rice stock to buffer norm* Ratio 2.2 2.6 2.9
Wheat stock to buffer norm* Ratio 1.5 1.9 1.9
Sources: Tractor Manufactures Association; SIAM; Ministry of Chemicals
and Fertilisers; Ministry of Rural Development; CMIE; RBI; and Food
Corporation of India. Sources: NSO and RBI staff estimates.
*: As at end-August.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.20: Index of Industrial Production (IIP)
a: Sectoral Contribution to IIP Growth (y-o-y) b: Sectoral Contribution to IIP Growth over 2019
c: Use-based Contribution to IIP Growth (y-o-y) d: Use-based Contribution to IIP Growth over 2019
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
but gained momentum in June-July. The production
Chart III.21: PLI Scheme: Sectoral
of motor vehicles, trailers, machinery equipment,
Financial Outlays
electrical equipment, textiles and beverages supported
IIP growth in July.
Manufacturing activity is expected to be boosted by
the PLI scheme for 13 sectors, aimed at creating global
manufacturing champions for an AtmaNirbhar Bharat,
with an outlay of about Rs. 1.97 lakh crore over 5 years.
The PLI scheme, implemented across ten sectors so far
(Chart III.21), can improve the manufacturing sector’s
global competitiveness and participation in the global
supply chain, giving impetus to domestic production,
exports, investment in cutting edge technology,
innovations and employment opportunities by
establishing linkages with the MSME sector.
Source: PIB.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart III.22: Electricity Generation and Consumption
a: Electricity Generation and Demand Growth b: Electricty Consumption: Region-wise
Sources: Central Electricity Authority and Power System Operation Corporation Limited (POSOCO).
Electricity generation improved substantially in According to the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook
Q1:2021-22 on a y-o-y basis but remained below 2019- survey, the manufacturing sector’s sentiments
20 levels. Thermal and renewable sources expanded rebounded in Q2:2020-21, with the business
y-o-y by 24.1 per cent and 12.9 per cent, respectively, assessment index improving to 116.7 in Q2:2021-22
with the latter surpassing 2019-20 levels. In Q2, the from 89.7 in Q1:2021-22. For Q3:2021-22, respondents
electricity generation expanded by 1.6 per cent and expect further improvement in production volumes,
15.8 per cent, respectively, in July and August, with new orders and job landscape. The manufacturing
hydro and thermal power generation also exceeding
pre-pandemic levels (Chart III.22a). Electricity Chart III.23: Manufacturing Sector's Profitability
consumption rose across the country in July and
August, with base effects leading to faster growth
in some regions (Chart III.22b). Competition and
efficiency in electricity distribution should accrue
from the Electricity Amendment Bill 2021 which aims
to delicense electricity distribution and allow entry of
private players.
The buoyant y-o-y expansion in nominal GVA of
manufacturing in Q1 was supported by strong corporate
profitability (Chart III.23). Apart from the base effect,
the substantial contraction in interest expenses on
the back of easy financial conditions contributed to
Note: Data for Q1:2021-22 are based on results of 1,647 listed private
the surge in profitability, even as employee costs and manufacturing companies.
Source: RBI staff estimates based on data published by listed companies.
operating expenses posted an uptick.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.24: PMI Manufacturing and Services
a: PMI Manufacturing b: PMI Services
Note: >50: Expansion, < 50: Contraction.
Source: IHS Markit.
purchasing managers’ index (PMI) remained in Overall, the manufacturing activity is gradually
expansion zone at 53.7 in September, driven by normalising with the waning of the second wave
strengthening demand conditions (Chart III.24a). (Table III.9). Consumer non-durables, surpassed the
Table III.9: Industrial Sector: Progress towards Normalisation
(Ratio to the respective month/quarter of 2019-2020)
Indicators 2020-21 2021-22
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep
I Industrial Production
PMI: Manufacturing (>50 indicates growth over previous month) 35.1 51.6 57.2 56.9 51.5 55.5 50.8 48.1 55.3 52.3 53.7
II Index of Industrial Production 64 94 102 106 93 100 86 95 100
Manufacturing 60 94 102 107 92 99 83 94 98
Capital goods 35 87 99 109 74 82 61 79 100
Infrastructure & construction goods 53 98 105 110 98 107 89 98 102
Consumer durables goods 32 90 107 118 73 81 57 83 92
Consumer non-durables goods 83 100 103 105 98 100 92 102 100
III Eight Core Industries Index 76 95 100 104 96 101 92 96 102 104
Steel 51 100 103 113 97 102 92 96 102 106
Cement 62 89 96 110 97 104 88 100 105 117
Electricity demand 84 99 106 108 98 107 91 97 106 115 105
III Production of Automobiles
Passenger vehicles 16 93 116 117 83 96 43 116 112 99
Two wheelers 21 95 118 129 60 81 31 70 84 89
Three wheelers 23 45 66 84 61 69 51 62 66 57
Production of tractors 60 123 162 167 133 128 105 171 149 151
Sources: CMIE; CEIC; NSO; SIAM; and RBI staff estimates.
(cid:197) Below pre-Covid level Normalisation / recovery of activity (cid:198)

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
pre-COVID levels during June and remained strong in while finished steel consumption moderated in
Q2, while infrastructure and primary goods, steel, and August (Chart III.25).
cement made progress towards normalisation in June
Transportation services remained relatively upbeat
and surpassed pre-pandemic level in Q2.
during Q1 and gained further in Q2 with the gradual
III.2.3 Services unwinding of the regional lockdowns. Railway freight
traffic remains above pre-COVID levels and posted
The second wave impacted the services sector in a
a robust growth of 16.9 per cent in August, while
disproportionately high manner in view of the blow
port cargo traffic reached its pre-pandemic level in
to contact-intensive services. Services contracted by
August. Toll collections in Q1 and Q2 have stayed above
double digits sequentially in Q1:2021-22, interrupting
the pre-pandemic levels due to a greater use of FASTag
the recovery from the first wave. On a y-o-y basis,
(Table III.9). Commercial vehicle sales – an indicator of
however, the services sector expanded by 16.1 per cent
transportation services – almost halved sequentially
in Q1:2021-22 driven by a favourable base effect. With in Q1, but there are reports of an uptick in sales in
the retreating of the second wave, services regained Q2. The aviation sector displayed segmentation, with
momentum in Q2 as shown by high frequency passenger traffic lagging cargo traffic considerably.
indicators, and contact-intensive services began Domestic air passenger traffic is, however, gaining
mending with the gradual easing of restrictions and traction with the lifting of the restrictions and
the accelerated pace of vaccination (Table III.9). GST increasing confidence. The communication services
collections and issuances of e-way bills – indicators performed well in Q1 and Q2, driven by pandemic-
of wholesale and retail trade – revived to pre- induced digitisation of the economy.
pandemic levels from June/July onwards, suggesting Despite the strong performance of information
strengthening domestic trading activity. Some revival technology and financial companies, GVA in financial,
in discretionary spending and pent-up demand are real estate and professional services posted a
also boosting trading activity and e-commerce. In the subdued growth of 3.7 per cent in Q1 and moderated
construction sector, cement production rose further substantially over the preceding quarter as businesses
Chart III.25: Services Sector
a: Service Sector Components b: Construction Indicators
Sources: Office of Economic Adviser, Joint Plant Committee, Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, Ministry of Commerce & Industry.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Table III.10: Services Sector: Progress towards Normalisation
(Ratio to the respective month/quarter of 2019-2020)
Indicators 2020-21 2021-22
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep
PMI: Services (>50 indicates growth over previous month) 17.2 41.9 53.4 54.2 47.2 54 46.4 41.2 45.4 56.7 55.2
I Construction
Steel consumption 49 93 114 121 98 111 89 95 94 85
Cement production 62 89 96 110 97 104 88 100 105 117
II Trade, hotels, transport, communication and services related to broadcasting
Commercial vehicle sales (Quarterly average) 15 80 99 143 51
Domestic air passenger traffic 7 25 50 72 31 52 17 26 42 56
Domestic air cargo 26 68 90 105 78 95 66 74 83 87
International air cargo 43 77 87 101 94 96 91 95 92 94
Freight traffic 79 105 111 113 110 110 109 111 113 122 121
Port cargo 80 91 102 108 102 102 102 102 93 100 99
Toll collection: volume 184 349 295 174 548 633 423 593 704 719 675
Petroleum consumption 74 89 99 102 88 93 79 92 95 93
GST E-way bill 50 100 115 128 97 112 74 106 118 120 128
GST revenue 59 92 108 114 107 124 102 93 114 114 127
III Financial, real estate and professional services
Credit outstanding y-o-y growth (per cent) 5.6 5.1 6.2 5.6 5.9 6.2 5.9 6.1 6.1 6.7 6.7
Bank deposits y-o-y growth (per cent) 9.6 10.5 10.8 11.4 9.9 11.2 9.5 9.8 9.8 9.5 9.3
Life insurance: first year premium 81 116 97 135 87 98 70 93 95 118
Non-life insurance premium 95 106 105 114 108 109 101 114 140 137
Sources: CMIE; CEIC; NSO; MOSPI; IRDAI; RBI staff estimates.
(cid:197) Below pre-Covid level Normalisation / recovery of activity (cid:198)
in other segments faltered due to mobility related Public administration, defence and other services
restrictions. Some recovery, however, was seen in (PADO) expanded moderately in Q1:2021-22 on a y-o-y
the travel and hospitality industries, real estate and basis. The central government’s revenue expenditure,
other contact-intensive professional services in Q2. excluding interest payments and subsidies, contracted
Growth in aggregate deposits remained buoyant and in Q1 on an unfavourable base while that of state
bank credit recorded some improvement, extending governments posted a double-digit growth. Other
support to financial services during Q2. Real estate services in PADO – private education; heath; personal
activity dampened in Q1 as new launches and sales services; and cultural and recreational activities –
were hampered by the lockdowns. The inventory remained tepid.
overhang stagnated at an average of 58 months in Q1
In August and September, the PMI services re-entered
(Chart III.26a). All-India housing prices, according to
the expansion zone reversing the second wave
the RBI’s index, showed a deceleration in Q1:2021-
induced contraction of May-July (Chart III.24b). The
22, dragged down by Bengaluru, Chennai and Delhi
PMI composite output index rose to 55.3 in September
(Chart III.26b).
from 49.2 in July.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart III.26: Housing Sector – Launches, Sales and Prices
a: Housing Activity b: Housing Price Index of RBI
Sources: PropTiger and RBI.
III. Conclusion minimum support prices for the ensuing rabi season.
The recovery in manufacturing and services activities,
The momentum of economic activity was interrupted
during Q1:2021-22 by the second wave. Aggregate including contact-intensive services, in H2 should get
demand began reviving in June and gained momentum a fillip from the growing proportion of the inoculated
in Q2. It is expected to strengthen further in H2 with
population, further normalisation of supply chains,
the recovery in both urban and rural consumption.
congenial financing conditions and the government’s
On the supply side, agriculture and allied activities
infrastructure and asset monetisation push. The
should benefit from the good kharif sowing and
outlook, however, remains critically dependent upon
harvest. Rabi sowing and total crops production are
expected to be well-supported by improving water the evolution of COVID-19’s trajectory and the progress
storage in reservoirs and the early announcement of of vaccination to cover the rest of the population.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
IV. Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
During H1:2021-22, domestic financial markets remained vibrant amidst easy liquidity conditions,
notwithstanding the ravages unleashed by the virulent second wave of the pandemic in April-May 2021. Monetary
transmission improved further, due to abundant liquidity and forward guidance by the MPC of continuing with
the accommodative stance. Going forward, liquidity conditions would continue to be accommodative in consonance
with the monetary policy stance through calibrated liquidity management operations.
Global financial markets remained exuberant financial markets. Concerns about a possible third
through most of H1:2021-22, buoyed by a surfeit of wave, uncertainty over the path of the US Fed’s
liquidity, ultra-accommodative monetary policies tapering of asset purchases, elevated inflation, and
in major advanced economies (AEs) and forward the large government borrowing programme kept
guidance promising continuation of these policies. market sentiments edgy.
Investor optimism has caused valuations across a
IV.1.1 Money Market
range of assets to be elevated. Stock markets scaled
Money market rates consistently traded below the
peaks repeatedly in most AEs and select emerging
reverse repo rate – the lower bound of the liquidity
market economies (EMEs), with intermittent bouts
adjustment facility (LAF) corridor – during H1:2021-
of corrections sparked by the rapid spread of the
22 (Chart IV.1). The weighted average call rate (WACR)
Delta variant of COVID-19. Bond yields softened in
– the operating target of monetary policy – traded
AEs as markets increasingly acquiesced with central
17 basis points (bps) below the floor of the corridor
banks that inflationary pressures are transient and
on an average during H1. With the Reserve Bank
would not trigger normalisation. In EMEs, bond yields
becoming the major counterparty for banks, there was
experienced two-way movements, with phases of
hardening in response to the uncertainty over the
Chart IV.1: Liquidity, Policy Corridor and WACR
timing and pace of tapering of asset purchases by the
US Federal Reserve. In currency markets, the US dollar
strengthened from May 2021 on better economic
prospects and consequently, some EME currencies
depreciated while others faced appreciation pressures
because of carry trade and search for returns.
IV.1 Domestic Financial Markets
During H1:2021-22, domestic financial markets
remained vibrant amidst easy liquidity conditions,
notwithstanding the ravages unleashed by the virulent
second wave of the pandemic in April-May 2021. Large
liquidity injections, including through the secondary
market acquisition programme of government
Source: Reserve Bank of India (RBI).
securities (G-SAP), ensured orderly conditions in

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
a shrinkage in inter-bank trading activity – average total overnight money market volume – from 6.0 per
daily volume in the call money market declined to cent in February 2020 (pre-pandemic) to 2.0 per cent
`7,381 crore in September 2021 from `10,126 crore in in September 2021. In the collateralised segment, the
March 2021. share of triparty repo in total overnight money market
volume increased to 74 per cent in September 2021
In the overnight call money segment, the weighted
from 72 per cent in March 2021 while the share of
average rate (WAR) of traded deals generally remained
market repo declined to 24 per cent from 26 per cent
above the reverse repo rate while that on reported
during the same period (Chart IV.3). Mutual funds,
deals1 remained below the reverse repo rate, reflecting
the major lenders in both the collateralised segments,
market segmentation as small co-operative banks –
increased their participation further in H1 from 68 per
principal lenders in reported deals – do not have the
cent to 70 per cent in the triparty repo segment and
requisite information technology (IT) infrastructure
from 61 per cent to 63 per cent in market repos. On
to access the Negotiated Dealing System - Call (NDS-
the borrowing side, there was an increase in the share
Call) and usually lend bilaterally towards the close of
of private banks in both the secured segments – from
market hours at lower rates. The share of the reported
24 per cent in March 2021 to 25 per cent in September
deals in total volumes in the call money segment
2021 for triparty repo and from 13 per cent to 14 per
increased to 60 per cent in H1:2021-22 from 54 per
cent for market repo.
cent in H2:2020-21 (Chart IV.2), driven by a rise in
lending by co-operative banks from 65 per cent of the The rates in the secured overnight segments remained
total volume of the call money segment to 80 per cent consistently below the reverse repo rate during
over the same period. H1:2021-22 on surplus liquidity (Chart IV.4). Interest
rates on longer-term money market instruments like
The surplus liquidity conditions also led to a
91-day Treasury Bills (T-bills) and 3-month certificates
diminishing share of the uncollateralised segment in
of deposit (CDs) traded marginally above the reverse
Chart IV.2: Share of Traded/Reported repo rate, on average, by 1 bp and 8 bps, respectively
Deals in Call Money Market
Chart IV.3: Share in Overnight
Money Market Volumes
Sources: Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL); and RBI.
1 ‘Traded deals’ are negotiated directly on the NDS-Call platform whereas
‘reported deals’ are over-the-counter (OTC) deals which are reported on
Source: RBI.
the NDS-Call platform after the completion of negotiation of deals.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
crore during the corresponding period of 2020-21
Chart IV.4: Money Market Rates
(Chart IV.5a). CP rates generally traded above the
reverse repo rate, with an average spread of 46 bps
during H1:2021-22. The weighted average discount
rate (WADR) firmed up in July 2021 due to increased
issuances by non-banking financial companies (NBFCs),
partly to mobilise resources for investment in initial
public offerings (IPOs), but moderated subsequently.
The share of NBFCs in total CP issuances increased to
43.2 per cent in H1: 2021-22 from 21.9 per cent in the
corresponding period of the previous year while that
of corporates moderated to 46.2 per cent from 64.9
per cent over the same period (Chart IV.5b).
IV.1.2 Government Securities (G-sec) Market
Sources: RBI; CCIL-F-TRAC; Financial Benchmarks India Private Ltd. (FBIL); and During H1:2021-22, the 10-year G-sec yield softened
RBI staff estimates.
by 11 bps, aided by a host of measures taken by the
during H1:2021-22. Issuance of CDs increased to
Reserve Bank to foster an orderly evolution of the
`56,658 crore during H1:2021-22 from `45,165 crore
yield curve. During April-May 2021, the 10-year G-sec
in the corresponding period of 2020-21, reflecting
yield softened by 6 bps on (i) the monetary policy
congenial financing conditions.
committee (MPC) continuing with its accommodative
Riding on the surplus liquidity conditions, commercial growth-supportive stances; (ii) the announcement
paper (CP) issuances increased substantially to of G-SAP 1.0 of `1 lakh crore for Q1; and (iii) special
`10.1 lakh crore during H1:2021-22 from `7.9 lakh OMOs (operation twist) of `10,000 crore, although
Chart IV.5: Primary Issuances of Commercial Paper
a: Systemic Liquidity, Issuances and WADR b: Institutional Break-up
Sources: RBI; CCIL-F-TRAC; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
fears of additional government borrowing to bridge the The dynamics of movements in the yield curve can
GST compensation cess shortfall imparted transient be captured by its level and slope2 (Chart IV.7a). While
bearishness to market sentiment. Yields hardened in the average level of yields softened by 3 bps, the slope
June by 8 bps over elevated May inflation print and steepened by 28 bps during H1. Short term yields
higher crude oil prices. Overall, however, the 10-year remained anchored around the policy rate while long
yield remained range bound during Q1:2021-22. term yields reflected inflation concerns and the size of
In Q2, the 10-year yield initially declined to 6.13 per the government borrowing programme (Chart IV.7b).
cent on July 15, 2021 aided by a lower than expected
At the shorter end of the secondary market, yields on
CPI inflation print for June and issuance of a new
treasury bills (T-bills) softened and traded below the
10-year benchmark security at a coupon of 6.10 per
reverse repo rate for some maturities (Chart IV.8). In
cent (Chart IV.6). In August, however, yields hardened
terms of the traded volume, 91-day T-bills remained
by 5 bps in reaction to the MPC’s inflation forecast
the dominant segment in the secondary market with
being revised upwards above expectations and fears
a share of about 41 per cent.
of liquidity tightening on the announcement of a
In order to facilitate debt consolidation, the Reserve
calendar for an enhanced scale of variable rate reverse
Bank conducted six switch operations on behalf of
repo (VRRR) auctions. In the first half of September,
yields softened as these apprehensions were allayed, the central government amounting to `31,907 crore
along with (i) the resumption of portfolio debt during H1:2021-22. The weighted average maturity
inflows; (ii), lower than expected fiscal deficit of the (WAM) of the outstanding stock of G-secs increased to
central government for April-July; and (iii) a softer CPI 11.57 years at end-September 2021 from 11.31 years at
inflation print. Yields, however, firmed up during the end-March 2021. The weighted average coupon (WAC)
second half of the month tracking US treasury yields moderated to 7.15 per cent from 7.27 per cent over the
and hardening crude oil prices. same period.
Chart IV.6: 10-year Yield, Repo Rate and Liquidity Conditions
Softer than expected CPI print, issuance of new paper
G-SAP announcement Rise in CPI
Illiquidity on
previous papers
Rise in US treasury yields and
crude oil prices
Sources: RBI, and FBIL.
2 The level is the average of par yields of all tenors up to 30-years published by FBIL and the slope (term spread) is the difference in par yields of 3-months
and 30-year maturities.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.7: G-Sec Yield Curve
a: Shifts b: Changes in Level and Slope
Source: FBIL and RBI staff estimates
State Development Loans IV.1.3 Corporate Bond Market
The weighted average spread of cut-off yields on Corporate bond yields softened during H1:2021-22
state development loans (SDLs) over G-sec yields while risk premia (over G-sec yields of comparable
of comparable maturities declined to 48 bps in maturities) exhibited a mixed trend amidst moderation
H1:2021-22 from 53 bps in H1:2020-21 (Chart IV.9). in new issuances. The monthly average yield on AAA-
The average inter-state spread on securities of 10-year rated 3-year bonds issued by NBFCs declined by 37 bps
tenor (fresh issuances) was 4 bps in H1:2021-22 as to 5.32 per cent, while those on corporates and public-
compared with 9 bps in H1:2020-21. sector undertakings (PSUs), financial institutions (FIs)
Chart IV.9: SDLs - Amount Raised and Spread
Chart IV.8: FBIL -T-Bill Benchmark
(Yield to Maturity)
Source: FBIL. Sources: RBI and Staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart IV.10: Corporate Bond Yields and Spread on AAA-rated 3-year bonds
a: Yields b: Spreads
Source: Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA).
and banks moderated by 32 bps to 5.24 per cent and Issuances of corporate bonds in the primary market
by 48 bps to 5.33 per cent, respectively (Chart IV.10a). declined to `1.81 lakh crore during H1:2021-22
During the same period, the monthly average risk (up to August 2021) from `3.17 lakh crore during
premium or spread on AAA-rated 3-year bonds (over the corresponding period of the previous year
3-year G-sec yields) increased marginally from 48 bps (Chart IV.11a). Resource mobilisation in the corporate
to 49 bps for NBFCs and from 35 bps to 40 bps for bond market was overwhelmingly through the private
corporates while moderating from 60 bps to 50 bps for placement route (97.0 per cent).
PSUs, FIs and banks (Chart IV.10b).
Outstanding investments by foreign portfolio
Corporate bond yields eased across tenors and ratings investors (FPIs) in corporate bonds declined marginally
spectrum. For the lowest rated investment grade from `1.33 lakh crore at end-March 2021 to `1.28 lakh
corporate bonds (BBB-), yields declined by 18 bps crore at end-September 2021. Consequently, their
(Table IV.1). The market perception of credit risk also utilisation of the approved limits declined from 24.5
improved, with the 3-year credit default swap (CDS) per cent to 22.3 per cent. The daily average secondary
spreads for the State Bank of India and the ICICI Bank market trading volume declined by 26.0 per cent to
moderating by 2 bps and 3 bps, respectively, during H1. `7,056 crore during H1 (up to August 2021) over the
Table IV.1: Financial Markets - Rates and Spread
Instrument Interest Rates (per cent) Spread (bps) (over corresponding risk-free rate)
Mar 2021 Sep 2021 Variation (in bps) Mar 2021 Sep 2021 Variation (in bps)
1 2 3 (4 = 3-2) 5 6 (7 = 6-5)
Corporate Bonds
(i) AAA (1-yr) 4.30 4.17 -13 32 35 3
(ii) AAA (3-yr) 5.56 5.24 -32 35 40 5
(iii) AAA (5-yr) 6.27 5.88 -39 17 4 -13
(iv) AA (3-yr) 6.31 6.07 -24 110 124 14
(v) BBB-minus (3-yr) 10.17 9.99 -18 496 516 20
10-yr G-sec 6.19 6.18 -1
Note: Yields and spreads are computed as monthly averages.
Source: FIMMDA and Bloomberg.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.11: Corporate Bond Market Activity
a: Primary Market Issuances b: Secondary Market Turnover - Daily Average
Source: SEBI.
corresponding period of the previous year, in sync activity post the second wave, strong corporate
with the reduction in new issuances (Chart IV.11b). earnings, and pick-up in the vaccination drive. The
BSE Sensex gained 19.4 per cent in H1 to close at
Most of the debt issuances in H1:2021-22 were
59,126 on September 30, 2021 (Chart IV.13a). Indian
undertaken by firms in financial services, banking/
equities emerged as the best performing amongst
term lending, and the housing finance sector
peers on a year to date (YTD) basis (Chart IV.13b) with
(Chart IV.12).
their share in world market capitalisation increasing
IV.1.4 Equity Market
to 2.93 per cent on September 30, 2021 from the long-
The Indian equity market scaled new highs in H1:2021- term average of 2.43 per cent (Chart IV.13c). During
22, lifted by the gradual normalisation of economic H1:2021-22, FPIs were net buyers to the tune of ` 8,326
crore while net purchases of domestic institutional
Chart IV.12: Industry-wise Debt Issuances investors (DIIs) amounted to `47,763 crore
(Chart IV.13d).
The bull run rode on higher domestic participation,
buoyed by the increasing interest of retail investors.
Direct retail holdings in NSE listed stocks rose to 7.2
per cent of market capitalisation in June 2021 from
6.4 per cent in December 2019 (Chart IV.14a). The
number of dematerialised (Demat) accounts with the
country’s two main depositories has gone up from 5.5
crore at end-March 2021 to 6.49 crore at end-July 2021.
Furthermore, indirect retail participation through
monthly systematic investment plans (SIPs) reached a
new high of `9,923 crore in August – 8.1 per cent above
March 2021. The number of retail SIP accounts surged
Source: Prime Database.
to 4.3 crore with 24.9 lakh new accounts registered

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart IV.13: Stock Market Indices and Institutional Investments
a: BSE Sensex and Dow Jones Industrial Average b: Major EM and AE Indices: Sep 21 over March 21
c: India's Share in World Market Capitalisation d: Net Investment in Equity by Institutional Investors
Note: *Long term average computed for last 10 years.
Sources: Bloomberg; NSDL; Capitaline and SEBI.
in August – the highest-ever monthly registration The exuberance in the equity market was also
(Chart IV.14b). reflected in the IPO segment. During H1:2021-22,
Chart IV.14: Retail Participation in Equity Market
a. Direct Retail Holdings in Stocks b. Mutual Fund SIP Accounts and their Contribution
Sources: Prime Database and Association of Mutual Funds in India (AMFI).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.15: Initial Public Offer and Equity Risk Premium
a: Initial Public Offers (Equity) b: Equity Risk Premium for India
Note: Data exclude IPOs raised on SME platforms.
Sources: SEBI, Bloomberg and RBI staff estimates.
22 IPOs were listed, mobilising `46,316 crore as By May 28, the INR appreciated to `72.48. In June, it
against `1,798 crore in the corresponding period last traded with a depreciation bias, despite robust FPI
year (Chart IV.15a). The amounts raised through rights equity inflows, as the US dollar gained traction. Since
issues, however, fell sharply to `793 crore in H1from then, the INR has moved in both directions driven by
`59,983 crore during the corresponding period of the FPI flows, crude oil prices and incoming information
previous year. The total mobilisation through public on monetary policy normalisation plans of major
and rights issues reduced to `50,529 crore from advanced economies.
`76,830 crore over the same period.
The equity risk premium (ERP)3 – the difference Chart IV.16: Movements of Indian Rupee and
between returns on equity and the risk-free rate – US Dollar Index
eased through H1:2021-22 with the gradual recovery
in market sentiments and moderated from 6.3 per
cent at the height of the pandemic (end-March 2020)
to 3.2 per cent by end-September 2021, moving below
the pre-pandemic level (Chart IV.15b).
IV.1.5. Foreign Exchange Market
The Indian rupee (INR) exhibited two-way movements
in H1:2021-22. It traded with a depreciating bias in
April 2021 and touched `75.17 per US dollar on April
15 amidst FPI outflows and an appreciation of the
US dollar (Chart IV.16). The depreciating bias quickly
reversed as FPI flows rebounded with a sharp fall in
Sources: FBIL; and Thomson Reuters.
domestic COVID-19 cases and a weakening US dollar.
3 Sachdeva, P. and A. Borad (2020), “Demystifying Equity Prices using Dividend Discount Model: An Indian Context”, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin,
October.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart IV.17: Cross-Currency Movements
a: Movement of Major EME Currencies against US Dollar b: Movement in REER
(end-September 2021 over end-March 2021) (August 2021 over March 2021)
Sources: RBI; FBIL; IMF; Thomson Reuters; and Bank for International Settlements (BIS).
The depreciation of the INR in nominal terms (against per cent (at end-September 2021 over the average
the US dollar) as well as the appreciation of the real of March 2021), while it appreciated by 1.3 per cent
effective exchange rate (REER) in H1 was modest in terms of the 40-currency REER (Table IV.2). The
relative to EME peers (Chart IV.17). divergence between the two indices essentially
reflects India’s higher inflation vis-à-vis its major
In terms of the 40-currency nominal effective
trading partners.
exchange rate (NEER), the INR depreciated by 0.9
IV.1.6 Credit Market
Table IV.2: Nominal and Real Effective Exchange
During H1, credit offtake improved, with non-food
Rate Indices (Trade-weighted)
credit growth (y-o-y) increasing to 6.8 per cent on
(Base: 2015-16 = 100)
September 24, 2021 from 5.1 per cent a year ago
Item Index: end-September Appreciation (+) /
2021 (P) Depreciation (-) (Per cent) (Chart IV.18).
end-September 2021 over
March (average) 2021 Credit growth among public sector banks remained
40-currency REER 105.3 1.3
modest, while there has been some uptick in the case
40-currency NEER 94.2 -0.9
6-currency REER 103.2 1.5 of the private sector banks (Chart IV.19a), which have
6-currency NEER 87.6 -1.1 provided the bulk (56.7 per cent) of the incremental
`/US$ 74.26 -2.0
credit extended by scheduled commercial banks
P: Provisional.
Sources: RBI; and FBIL. (SCBs) on a y-o-y basis (as on September 24, 2021).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
(y-o-y) in August 2021 on the back of a favourable
Chart IV.18: Non-food Credit Growth of SCBs
monsoon and measures to support the farm sector
(Chart IV.20a). Industrial credit growth remained
subdued, mainly due to a decline in credit to large
industries (which account for more than 80 per
cent of credit extended to the sector). Credit to
medium, and micro and small industries improved,
benefitting from the government’s support measures
for the MSME sector and the enhancement of the
emergency credit line guarantee scheme (ECLGS) to
support COVID-19 affected sectors. Services sector
credit growth decelerated, dampened by the second
wave of the pandemic. In terms of the contribution
of different sectors in incremental credit (y-o-y basis),
personal loans accounted for the largest share (52.5
Source: RBI.
per cent) followed by the agriculture sector (22.2
per cent) (Chart IV.20b). The overall non-food credit
They were followed by public sector banks (33.3 per growth in H1:2021-22 remains primarily driven by
cent) and foreign banks (10.0 per cent) (Chart IV.19b). personal loans and credit to the agriculture sector
(Chart IV.20c).
Among the major sectors4, credit to agriculture
continued to register double-digit growth since Within industry, credit to textiles, and chemicals and
April 2021 and accelerated to 11.3 per cent chemical products registered accelerated growth in
Chart IV.19: Credit Flow across Bank-Groups
a: Growth b: Share
Source: RBI.
4 Data on sectoral credit relate to select banks accounting for around 90 per cent of the total non-food credit.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart IV.20: Sectoral Deployment of Bank Credit
a: Growth (y-o-y)
b: Share in Incremental Non-food Credit (y-o-y) c: Non-food Credit Growth: Contribution of Major
Sub-sectors (y-o-y)
Source: RBI.
H1:2021-22 (up to August). Credit to infrastructure – have been raising resources mainly from money and
which accounts for around 38 per cent of industrial debt markets. Credit growth to transport operators,
credit – also showed improvement, led by credit to however, recovered in August 2021 after slipping into
roads and airports. Credit growth to food processing, negative territory in April 2021 (Chart IV.21c). Credit
to the trade sector contributed 1.5 percentage points
beverage and tobacco lost momentum, while
to the overall credit growth of the services sector in
credit to basic metal and metal products contracted
August 2021 (Chart IV.21d). Credit growth to personal
(Chart IV.21a). The prime drivers of overall credit
loan segment accelerated to 12.1 per cent in August
growth to industry were infrastructure and textiles
2021 from 8.5 per cent a year ago, supported by special
(Chart IV.21b).
schemes of banks to support households during the
Credit growth to the services sector decelerated to pandemic. Credit to housing, the largest constituent of
3.5 per cent in August 2021 from 10.9 per cent a year the personal loan segment, showed signs of recovery
ago, largely due to slowdown in credit to NBFCs that in H1: 2021-22 (up to August 2021).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.21: Credit Growth in Select Sub-sectors
Industry
a: Growth (y-o-y) b: Contribution of Major Industries
Services
c: Growth (y-o-y) d: Contribution of Major Sub-components
*Other industries include industries such as ‘mining and quarrying’, ‘leather and leather products’, ‘wood and wood products’, ‘paper and paper products’, ‘petroleum, coal
products and nuclear fuels’, ‘rubber, plastic and their products’, ‘glass and glassware’, ‘cement and cement products’, ‘all engineering’, ‘vehicles, vehicle parts and transport
equipment’, ‘gems and jewellery’, ‘construction’ etc.
**Other services include services such as professional services, computer software, tourism, hotels and restaurants, shipping, aviation, mutual fund (MFs), banking and
finance other than NBFCs and MFs.
Source: RBI.
The asset quality of SCBs improved during 2021-22 Banks’ non-SLR investments – covering instruments
(up to June), with the overall non-performing assets like CPs, bonds, debentures and shares of public and
(NPA) ratio declining to 7.5 per cent in June 2021 from private corporates – were lower during H1:2021-22
8.0 per cent a year ago (Chart IV.22a). The NPA ratio in than a year ago mainly due to lower investment in
respect of retail loans and services increased over the bonds/shares and debentures (Chart IV.23a). Adjusted
same period (Chart IV.22b). non-food credit5 growth increased from 5.1 per cent
5 Sum of non-food credit extended by SCBs and their investments in commercial paper, bonds/shares/debentures issued by private and public
corporate sector.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart IV.22: Stressed Assets and Non-Performing Assets of SCBs
a: Overall Loan Portfolio of SCBs b: Sectoral Non-Performing Assets
Source: RBI.
in Q2:2020-21 to 6.2 per cent in Q2:2021-22 (Chart (LCR) requirements and collateral buffers for availing
IV.23b). the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) of the RBI
With credit offtake remaining muted relative to deposit (Chart IV.24).
growth, banks augmented their statutory liquidity
IV.2 Monetary Policy Transmission
ratio (SLR) portfolios. Excess SLR investments rose
Monetary transmission to deposit and lending
to 12.5 per cent of net demand and time liabilities
(NDTL) on September 10, 2021 from 11.0 per cent rates of banks improved further in H1:2021-22. The
of NDTL at end-March 2021. This provides banks abundance of systemic liquidity, forward guidance
the cushion to meet their liquidity coverage ratio by the MPC of continuing with the accommodative
Chart IV.23: Non-SLR Investment and Adjusted Non-Food Credit
a: Non-SLR Investment b: Adjusted Non-food Credit
Source: RBI.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.24: Excess SLR of Banks Table IV.3: Transmission from the Repo
Rate to Banks’ Deposit and Lending Rates
(Variation in basis points)
Period Repo Term Deposit Lending Rates
Rate Rates
Median WADTDR 1 - Year WALR WALR
TDR (Out- Median (Out- (Fresh
(Fresh standing MCLR standing Rupee
Deposits) Deposits) Rupee Loans)
Loans)
February 2019 - -110 -9 -7 -30 2 -43
September 2019
(Pre-External
Benchmark
Period)
October 2019 -140 -187 -174 -125 -120 -147
– September
2021 (External
Benchmark
Period)
*Up to September 10, 2021
March 2020 - -115 -154 -135 -103 -102 -121
Source: RBI.
September 2021
(COVID period)
stance, subdued credit demand and the introduction February 2019 – -250 -213 -181 -155 -118 -190
September 2021
of the external benchmark regime for select sectors
(Current Easing
in October 2019 aided monetary transmission. There Cycle)
has been a complete pass-through of the policy repo Memo
rate cuts to the weighted average lending rate (WALR) April 2021 – 0 0 -18 -5 -12 1
September 2021
on fresh rupee loans since October 2019 (Table IV.3).
Note: Latest data on WALRs and WADTDR pertain to August 2021.
The transmission of policy repo rate cuts to the WALR: Weighted average lending rate; WADTDR: Weighted average
domestic term deposit rate;
WALR on outstanding loans has also been sizeable at
MCLR: Marginal cost of funds-based lending rate; TDR: Term deposit rate.
120 bps in the external benchmark period (Box IV.1). Source: RBI.
Box IV.1: External Benchmark Regime and Transmission to Lending Rates
While the Reserve Bank has periodically refined the benchmarks effective October 1, 2019 and for medium
process of interest rate setting by banks, transmission enterprises effective April 1, 2020).
has hitherto been sluggish as banks relied on own cost of
Under this system, any change in the benchmark rate is
funds, i.e., internal benchmarks. The systems were also
mandated to be passed on to the lending rates for new
characterised by opacity, especially regarding the interest
and existing borrowers on a one-to-one basis and banks
rate resetting practices for existing borrowers. To address
are prohibited from adjusting their spreads for existing
these rigidities, the Reserve Bank decided to move to an
borrowers for a period of three years in the absence of
external benchmark system – an interest rate outside the
any significant credit event. Reflecting the regulatory
control of a bank and not necessarily linked to its internal
requirement, the share of external benchmark-linked
costs – for select categories of loans (viz., all new floating
loans in total outstanding floating rate loans increased
rate personal or retail loans and floating rate loans to
from 2.4 per cent in September 2019 to 32 per cent in June
micro and small enterprises (MSEs) to the policy repo
2021, contributing to a faster and fuller transmission.
rate or 3-month or 6-month T-bill rate or other specified
(Contd.)

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Table IV.1.1: Outstanding Floating Rate Rupee Loans of SCBs across Interest Rate Benchmarks
(Per cent to total)
Bank group Base Rate MCLR External Benchmark
Sep-19 Mar-20 Mar-21 Jun-21 Sep-19 Mar-20 Mar-21 Jun-21 Sep-19 Mar-20 Mar-21 Jun-21
Public sector banks 15.0 12.3 7.9 8.1 82.7 80.9 69.1 66.5 0.4 4.9 20.3 23.9
Private banks 8.3 6.8 3.9 3.6 86.7 74.9 52.6 49.6 4.6 17.3 42.7 46.1
Foreign banks 6.8 5.2 2.7 2.7 67.3 56.7 30.7 33.5 25.7 37.9 66.6 63.7
All SCBs 12.7 10.5 6.5 6.5 83.6 78.5 62.9 60.2 2.4 9.4 28.5 32.0
Note: Data pertain to 74 SCBs. Figures in table may not add up to hundred due to residual BPLR-linked loans.
Source: RBI.
There has been a concomitant fall in the share of MCLR- bps change in the repo rate results in 93 bps change in the
linked loans from 83.6 per cent to 60.2 per cent, over the WALR on fresh loans over time (equation 1)6.
same period, although these still have the largest share in
WALR_f = -11.8 + 0.93 REPO + 0.21 CD Ratio ..…. (1)
outstanding floating rate loans (Table IV.1.1).
(0.18) (0.00) (0.07)
As lending rates under the external benchmark regime
t = -0.56 t-1 -0.34 t-2 + 0.30 t – 0.01 t +
undergo automatic adjustments with the changes in the (0.0) (0.00) (0.01) (0.39)
benchmark rate, banks are incentivised to adjust their
0.40 t)*(DUMEBLR) – 0.10 DUMDEMO + 0.19 DUMTAPR - 0.11 ECTt-1 …… (2)
term as well as saving deposit rates to cushion their ne t (0.03) (0.10) (0.00) (0.00)
interest margins and profitability, which then hastens the
Notes: Figures in parentheses are p-values; Adjusted = 0.35; Breusch-
adjustment in banks’ marginal cost of funds, and MCLRs Godfrey LM test for null of no serial correlation (6 lags) (p-value) = 0.88;
(Chart IV.2.1). An error correction model (ECM) using the represents month-on-month change in the respective variables.
autoregressive distributed lag (ARDL) framework (Pesaran
The adjustment, however, takes time as indicated by
et al., 2001) for the period January 2013 to June 2021 with
the error correction coefficient of 0.11 (equation 2),
the following variables – weighted average lending rate
i.e., 11 per cent of the deviation from the equilibrium
on fresh rupee loans (WALR_f ), repo rate (REPO) and
relationship is corrected every month7. Thus, it takes six
credit to deposit ratio (CD Ratio) – indicates that a 100
months for one-half of the long-run pass-through. The
speed of adjustment can be expected to improve as the
Chart IV.1.1: WALR and Credit to Deposit
Ratio of SCBs proportion of external benchmark linked loans increases
further. This is borne out by the statistical significance of
the interaction between the changes in the repo rate and
the dummy representing the external benchmark period
((cid:39)REPO*DUM ).
t EBLR
References:
Pesaran, M.H, Shin, Y. and Smith, R.J. (2001), “Bounds
Testing Approaches to the Analysis of Level Relationships”,
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 16, 289-326.
Reserve Bank of India (2017), “Report of the Internal
Study Group to Review the Working of the Marginal Cost
of Funds-based Lending Rate System”.
6 Unit root tests indicate that WALR_f, REPO and CD Ratio are I(1). Based on AIC criteria, ARDL(3,1,1) model is selected. Bounds test confirms cointegration
at 1 per cent level of significance.
7 In equation 2, is dummy for the external benchmark period, i.e., October 2019 to June 2021; is dummy for taper tantrum period
(July to September 2013); and is dummy for the demonetisation period (November 2016 to February 2017).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.25: Lending Rates of Scheduled Chart IV.26: Transmission across Bank-Groups
Commercial Banks (February 2019 - August 2021)
Source: RBI. Source: RBI.
This has been facilitated by the sustained reduction sharpest in the case of education loans, followed by
in the marginal cost of funds-based lending rate other personal loans and loans to large industries
(MCLR) – the one-year median MCLR fell from 8.8 per (Chart IV.27).
cent in January 2019 to 7.25 per cent in August 2021
Chart IV.27: Transmission to WALR -
(Chart IV.25)8.
Sector-wise (April 2020 - August 2021)
Across bank groups, foreign banks exhibited maximum
transmission to lending and deposit rates, reflecting a
higher proportion of their liabilities being made up
of low cost and lower duration wholesale deposits,
which facilitates a faster repricing of interest rates
(Chart IV.26). Among domestic banks, public sector
banks (PSBs) and private sector banks (PvBs) exhibited
a similar degree of pass-through to lending rates. The
WALRs of PSBs, however, remain lower than those of
PvBs9.
The decline in WALRs on fresh rupee loans as well as
*: ‘Other personal loans’ include personal loans other than housing, vehicle,
outstanding rupee loans has been broad-based across education and credit card loans.
WALR: Weighted average lending rate.
sectors. For fresh loans, the decline in WALR was the Source: RBI.
8 With the policy rate cut cycle commencing in February 2019, more and more loans linked to MCLR (primarily in the 1-year bucket) are getting reset
from February 2020.
9 The WALR on fresh rupee loans for public sector banks and private sector banks stood at 7.51 per cent and 8.83 per cent, respectively, in August 2021.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart IV.28: Sector-wise WALR relative to 1-Year Chart IV.29: Transmission to WALR (Fresh Rupee
Median MCLR (August 2021) Loans) - Personal Loans and Loans to MSMEs
(October 2019 - August 2021)
Source: RBI. Source: RBI.
Spreads of WALRs on fresh rupee loans (relative to There has been a moderation in deposit rates across
1-year MCLR) are the lowest in the large industry tenors (Chart IV.30a). The median term deposit rate
segment. Among retail loans, the spread charged on fresh deposits – based on average card rates on
by domestic banks was the lowest in respect of fresh deposits across all tenors – has declined by 154
housing loans, given the lower risk of default and bps since March 2020 with a perceptible moderation
the availability of collateral. Other personal loans, in shorter tenor deposits of up to one-year maturity
i.e., loans other than housing, vehicle and education (180 bps) (Chart IV.30b). Consequently, the weighted
are mostly unsecured and carry higher credit risk, average domestic term deposit rate (WADTDR) on
mirrored in higher spreads (Chart IV.28). outstanding rupee deposits declined by 135 bps
during the period March 2020 to August 2021. The
The WALRs in respect of fresh rupee loans in the retail
median saving deposit rate for domestic banks, which
segment and loans to MSMEs declined significantly
had remained sticky at 3.5 per cent during October
during the period October 2019-August 2021
(Chart IV.29).
Table IV.4: Loans Linked to External Benchmark –
In respect of fresh rupee loans linked to the policy repo Spread of WALR (Fresh Rupee Loans) over the Repo
rate, the spread – WALR (fresh rupee loans) over the Rate (August 2021)
(Per cent)
repo rate – charged by domestic banks during August
Personal Loans
2021 was the lowest in the case of housing loans and
Housing Vehicle Education Other MSME
the highest in the case of other personal loans, in line personal loans
loans
with their risk profiles. The spreads charged by PSBs
Public sector banks 3.20 3.56 4.40 5.04 4.83
for vehicle and education loans were lower than those
Private sector banks 3.19 3.89 6.07 4.31 3.97
of private banks, while they were higher for MSME Domestic banks 3.19 3.60 4.75 4.98 4.47
loans and other personal loans (Table IV.4). Source: RBI.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.30: Credit, Surplus Liquidity and Deposit Rates
a: Deposit Rate, Credit Growth and b: Maturity wise Transmission to Median Term
Liquidity Conditions Deposit Rate (March 2020 to September 2021)
Sources: RBI; and RBI staff estimates.
2017 to May 2020, declined to 3 per cent in June 2020 The Government has left the interest rates on
and has remained at the same level since then. various small savings instruments unchanged since
Q2:2020-21. The currently prevailing rates are 47-178
Amongst domestic banks, PvBs have exhibited higher
bps higher than the formula-based rates for Q3:2021-
pass-through to term deposit rates compared to PSBs,
22 (Table IV.5).
resulting in some convergence in the levels of their
deposit rates (Chart IV.31).
With the moderation in interest rates on bank deposits
Interest rates on small saving schemes are and unchanged interest rates on small savings,
administered by the Government of India and are the latter have become attractive to depositors.
fixed on a quarterly basis at a spread of 0-100 bps The growth in accretions under small savings has
over and above G-sec yields of comparable maturities. consistently been above that of bank deposits since
Chart IV.31: Term Deposit Rates
a: WADTDR on Outstanding Rupee Term Deposits b: Median Term Deposit Rates on Fresh Deposits
Source: RBI.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Table IV.5: Interest Rates on Small Savings Instruments – Q3:2021-22
Small Savings Scheme Maturity Spread Average G-sec Yield Formula based Government Difference
(years) (Percentage (%) of Corresponding Rate of Interest Announced Rate (basis points)
point) $ Maturity (June 2021 - (%) (applicable of Interest (%) in
August 2021) for Q3:2021-22) Q3:2021-22
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (3) + (4) (6) (7) = (6) - (5)
Savings Deposit - - - - 4.00 -
Public Provident Fund 15 0.25 6.38 6.63 7.10 47
Term Deposits
1 Year 1 0 3.72 3.72 5.50 178
2 Year 2 0 4.23 4.23 5.50 127
3 Year 3 0 4.74 4.74 5.50 76
5 Year 5 0.25 5.76 6.01 6.70 69
Recurring Deposit Account 5 0 4.74 4.74 5.80 106
Monthly Income Scheme 5 0.25 5.73 5.98 6.60 62
Kisan Vikas Patra 124 Months# 0 6.38 6.38 6.90 52
NSC VIII issue 5 0.25 5.89 6.14 6.80 66
Senior Citizens Saving Scheme 5 1.00 5.76 6.76 7.40 64
Sukanya Samriddhi Account Scheme 21 0.75 6.38 7.13 7.60 47
$: Spreads for fixing small saving rates as per Government of India Press Release of February 2016.
#: Current maturity is 124 months.
Note: Compounding frequency varies across instruments.
Sources: Government of India; FBIL; and RBI staff estimates.
2018 and the gap has widened, with implications for IV.3 Liquidity Conditions and the Operating
monetary transmission as and when credit demand Procedure of Monetary Policy
picks up (Chart IV.32).
The RBI Act, 1934 requires the Reserve Bank to place the
operating procedure relating to the implementation
Chart IV.32: Deposits of Scheduled Commercial of monetary policy and changes thereto from time
Banks and Small Savings
to time, if any, in the public domain. In consonance
with the MPC’s accommodative stance, the Reserve
Bank continued with liquidity easing measures during
H1:2021-22, aimed at nurturing and supporting
the nascent growth impulses. The RBI announced
a secondary market G-sec acquisition programme
or G-SAP 1.0 in April 2021, with a commitment
to a specific amount of open market purchases of
government securities. The G-SAP is unconventional
on several counts. First, the RBI commits upfront the
amount to be purchased in contrast to regular OMO
purchases which are discretionary. Second, it entails
continued support to the market in view of the large
Source: RBI staff estimates.
government borrowing programme. Third, the size

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
of the purchases is significantly larger than OMOs Drivers and Management of Liquidity
in normal times, thus boosting demand for G-secs
During Q1:2021-22, currency expansion, build-up
amidst elevated supply during 2021-22.
of GoI cash balances and the restoration of the cash
During Q1, the RBI conducted three auctions under reserve ratio (CRR) to its pre-pandemic level were the
G-SAP 1.0 and purchased G-secs (including SDLs) of main sources of liquidity leakage while its accretion
`1.0 lakh crore, in line with the announced amount. was through G-SAP and forex purchases (Table IV.7).
In Q2, six auctions were conducted under G-SAP 2.0 Surplus liquidity – as reflected in average daily
aggregating `1.2 lakh crore. The G-SAP 2.0 auctions net absorptions under the LAF – amounted to
conducted on September 23 and September 30, `5.1 lakh crore.
2021 for `15,000 crore each were accompanied by
simultaneous sales of G-secs of identical amount. Table IV.7: Liquidity – Key Drivers and Management
(` crore)
Overall, net liquidity injected through OMO
2020-21 Q1: Q2: H1:
purchases, including G-SAP, amounted to `2.4 lakh
2021-22* 2021-22* 2021-22*
crore in HI. Under the G-SAP, the RBI purchased
Drivers
both on the run (liquid) and off the run (illiquid)
(i) CiC -4,06,452 -1,26,266 55,005 -71,261
securities across the maturity spectrum, with more (ii) Net forex purchases 5,10,516 1,60,843 1,42,395 3,03,238
(iii) GoI cash balances 1,18,999 -2,23,740 -5,600 -2,29,340
than 68 per cent of the purchases concentrated in
Management
over 5 to 10-year maturity segment, thus imparting
(i) Net OMO purchases 3,13,295 1,38,965 97,960 2,36,925
liquidity to securities across the term structure (ii) CRR balances -1,46,617 29,392 -16,470 12,922
(iii) Net LAF operations -152,302 -60,759 -2,86,162 -3,46,921
(Table IV.6). By containing volatility in G-sec yields – the
Memo;
benchmarks for the pricing of other financial market
1. Average daily
instruments – G-SAP helped to keep interest rates injection (LTRO,
TLTRO, On tap 1,58,491 82,948 84,488 83,722
benign, thereby facilitating monetary transmission. TLTRO, SLTRO and
MSF)
2. Average daily total
6,54,645 5,93,181 8,10,096 7,02,231
Table IV.6: G-SAP- Maturity Profile absorption (i+ii)
(i) Fixed rate
Residual Type of G-SAP 1.0 G-SAP 2.0 reverse repo 6,13,700 4,10,747 5,23,626 4,67,495
Maturity security
(Years) Face value Share Face value Share (ii) Variable rate
of G-sec in total of G-sec in total reverse repo 40,945 1,82,434 2,86,470 2,34,736
purchased purchases purchased purchases (VRRR)
(` crore) (per cent) (` crore) (per cent) 3. Average daily net
absorption during 4,96,154 5,10,233 7,25,609 6,18,509
Up to 5 On the run - - 6,885 5.7
the period (2-1)
Off the run 17,541 18.5 7,019 5.8
4. Outstanding total
Total 17,541 18.5 13,904 11.6 injection at the end 82,963 83,307 85,509 85,509
Over 5 On the run 42,635 45.1 4,377 3.6 of the period
to 10 Off the run 20,774 22.0 79,763 66.5 5. Outstanding total
absorption at the 4,93,904 6,85,828 9,14,463 9,14,463
Total 63,409 67.0 84,140 70.1
end of the period
Over 10 On the run 5,882 6.2 15,973 13.3
6. Outstanding net
to 14 Off the run 7,743 8.2 5,984 5.0 absorption at the 4,11,211 6,02,521 8,28,954 8,28,954
Total 13,625 14.4 21,957 18.3 end of the period
Grand Total 94,575* 100.0 1,20,001 100.0
*: Data on drivers and management are based on the last Friday of the
*: Total purchases made under G-SAP 1.0 amounted to `1.0 lakh crore, respective periods.
which includes G-sec of `0.95 lakh crore and SDLs of `0.05 lakh crore. Note: Inflow (+)to/outflow (-) from the banking system.
Source: RBI Source: RBI

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Lower liquidity leakage due to subdued currency
Chart IV.33 Currency in Circulation
expansion added to the persistence of large surplus
liquidity in H1:2021-22 (Chart IV.33). Despite the
second wave of the pandemic being more virulent, the
precautionary demand for cash remained muted. In
Q2, the usual return of currency during the monsoon
season, renewed vigour of capital inflows along with
liquidity injections through G-SAP 2.0 augmented
surplus liquidity. As a result, average daily net liquidity
absorptions in Q2 soared to `7.3 lakh crore.
Unabated capital inflows reflected on the forward
premium curve in the forex market – its shape being
determined by the interplay of institutional features
and regulatory aspects with the market microstructure
Source: RBI.
and flow factors, apart from macroeconomic
fundamentals (Box IV.2).
Box IV.2: Determinants of Forward Premia – A Macro-Finance Approach
According to the covered interest rate parity (CIP) be decomposed into its latent factors – level, slope and
condition, the forward premium reflects the interest curvature. An analysis based on monthly data (January
rate differential between two currencies of comparable 2015 to June 2021) for tenors spanning 1-12 months
maturity and risk profile. Capital controls and varying indicates that the first three principal components (PCs)
risk perceptions of investors can, however, lead to a explain more than 99 per cent of the variation in the
wedge in this relationship. Qualitative attributes (such data. The three PCs characterise the level, the slope and
as market sentiments, expectations, political stability the curvature, respectively, of the forward premium
and financial news) and quantitative factors (like crude curve.10
oil prices, central bank’s forex intervention and foreign
The determinants of forward premia for three tenors
exchange market turnover) also impact forward premia
viz., 1-month, 3-months and 12-months are separately
(Srikanth and Chittedi, 2014). While interest rate
short-listed using a machine learning approach (random
differentials explain the forward premia in the long-run
forest11 methodology) (Dilip et al, 2021). These variables
in line with CIP, the volatility in the spot rate influences
are: (i) the differential between yields on 3-month T-bills
it in the short-run (Biswas et al, 2018). Drawing upon
for US and India (Int_Diff); (ii) domestic system liquidity
the macro-finance literature on modelling the shape of
as proportion to GDP (Net_LAF); (iii) global economic
the yield curve through principal component analysis
policy uncertainty index (GEPU); (iv) RBI’s forward
(Diebold et al, 2006), the forward premium curve can
(Contd.)
10 The level is the weighted sum of changes in forward premia rates with the same sign across all maturities; a level shock changes the rates by identical
amounts across all maturities, indicating a parallel shift of the forward premia curve. The slope weighs changes in rates for short maturities with a
negative sign and those of medium and long maturities with a positive sign. Finally, the curvature associates positive signs with short and long-term
changes but negative signs with medium-term rate changes; a disproportionate shock to the medium-term rates vis-a-vis the short and long term rates
impacts the hump of the curve (Litterman and Scheinkman, 1991).
11 A random forest is a supervised machine learning algorithm that assesses the relative importance of each variable on the prediction.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
intervention (net forward purchases) as proportion of (Table IV.2.1). Stock market turbulence (captured by
forex reserves (Forward_Intervention); (v) CPI inflation NIFTY volatility) is associated with a marginal hardening
volatility (Vol_Inf); (vi) 3-month realised volatility of the level of the forward premia along with a steepening
of NIFTY 50 (Vol_NIFTY50); and (vii) trade deficit as of the curve as traders seek to hedge their positions.
The rise in the volatility in domestic inflation seems
proportion to GDP [Trade_Deficit]. The generalized
to increase risk aversion among market participants at
method of moments (GMM) approach – more specifically,
shorter and longer tenors, thus moderating the extent
the continuously updating GMM estimation (CUE)
of the hump in the forward premia curve. The increased
methodology using appropriate instrument variables12
availability of domestic liquidity moderates the level
– is deployed to address endogeneity concerns, after
and shape of the forward premia curve. Finally, forward
conducting due diligence for the time series properties
interventions by the RBI seems to flatten the slope and
of the variables.
reduce the curvature while increasing the level of the
The empirical results suggest positive and statistically premia. The analysis suggests that forward interventions
generally discourage carry trade activities by reducing
significant impact of interest rate differentials and global
the steepness of the forward premia curve. In a situation
uncertainty on the level of the forward premium curve
of large surplus liquidity, a steeper curve can trigger a
vicious cycle of higher inflows and even further increase
Table IV.2.1: Determinants of the Forward
in the forward premia.
Premia Curve
Explanatory (cid:39)Level Slope Curvature References
Variables/Dependent
Variable Biwas, D., S. Kumar, S., and A. Prakash (2018), “Do Spot
Rate Volatility and Forward Market Intervention by the
Lag of Dependent -0.40*(-1.97) 0.38***(4.57) 0.23***(3.16)
Variable Central Bank Impact the Forward Premia in India?”,
(cid:39)Int_Diff 0.64***(3.65) 0.20**(2.66) -
Asian Journal of Economics, Finance and Management,
(cid:39)Net_LAF -0.56***(-3.90) -0.15*(-1.73) -0.04***(-3.04)
1(1), pp 1-12.
(cid:39)GEPU(-1) 0.003**(2.15) - -
(cid:39)Forward_ 0.16*(1.77) -0.09**(-2.80) -0.03*(-1.69) Diebold, F., G. Rudebusch, G., and S. B. Aruoba (2006),
Intervention
“The Macroeconomy and the Yield Curve: A Dynamic
Vol_NIFTY50 0.02***(3.81) 0.01**(2.85) -
Latent Factor Approach”, Journal of Econometrics, 131(1-
Vol_Inf - - -0.05*(-1.99)
Trade_Deficit(-1) - 0.03**(2.37) 2), pp 309-338.
Constant -0.32***(-2.90) -0.23***(-4.23) 0.15***(3.38)
Dilip, A., P. Kumar, P. Sachdeva, K.M. Kushawaha and I.
Adj R-squared 0.21 0.32 0.30
Diagnostics Bhattacharyya (2021), “Recent Movements in Forward
J-Statistic (p-value) 0.55 0.95 0.44 Premia – An Analytical Perspective”, RBI mimeo.
(Over-identification
test) Litterman R. B., and J. Scheinkman, (1991) “Common
Q-statistic (p-value) 0.36 0.12 0.28 Factors Affecting Bond Returns”, The Journal of Fixed
(Serial correlation test
Income, Summer, 1(1) 54-61.
for 4 lags)
Note: ***, **, and * indicate 1 per cent, 5 per cent and 10 per cent levels Srikanth, M. and K. R. Chittedi (2014), “Perspectives on
of significance, respectively.
Forward Premia in India Forex Market: A Study of USD/
Figures in parenthesis are t-statistics based on heteroscedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent (HAC) corrected standard errors. INR”, Journal of Stock & Forex Trading, 3(4).
12 Apart from lagged variables as instruments, implied volatility of INR per USD rates for 3-months is used as an instrument variable for forward
intervention; the residuals from regressing stock market volatility on policy uncertainty are used as an instrument for the stock market variable.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart IV.34: Forward Intervention and Chart IV.35: Liquidity Absorption
Forward Premia
Source: RBI. Source: RBI.
With the moderation of the forward book in by fine-tuning operations conducted through VRRRs
H1:2021-22 (up to July), the pressure on the forward of 3, 4 and 7 days maturities. Notwithstanding the
premia somewhat eased (Chart IV.34). phased increase in the size of VRRRs, the surplus
liquidity absorbed through fixed rate reverse repo
The gradual normalisation of liquidity management
remained around `4.7 lakh crore (on an average) in
operations in sync with the revised liquidity
management framework instituted in February 2020 H1 (Chart IV.35).
was a key feature of liquidity management during
The enhancement in VRRR size was initially
H1:2021-22. As a part of this process, the CRR was
interpreted as a precursor to reversal of liquidity
restored to its pre-pandemic level of 4.0 per cent of
measures leading to a transient spike in G-sec yield on
NDTL in two phases of 0.5 percentage point increase in
the policy day, i.e., August 7, 2021 (Chart IV.36a). Such
the fortnights beginning March 27, 2021 and May 22,
fears, however, were unfounded as evident from the
2021. The surplus liquidity was mopped up through
relative stability in the bid-cover ratios of 14-day VRRR
the overnight fixed rate reverse repo and the VRRR
auctions in the immediate fortnights after the policy
auctions of varying maturities under the LAF. Keeping
announcement vis-à-vis before (Chart IV.36b).
in view the markets’ feedback and appetite for higher
remuneration, the Reserve Bank enhanced the size of Reflecting the liquidity injections through G-SAP and
the fortnightly VRRR auctions in a phased manner from capital inflows, reserve money (RM) increased by 14.7
`2.0 lakh crore during April-July to `2.5 lakh crore on per cent (y-o-y) as on September 24, 2021 (9.1 per cent
August 13, 2021; `3.0 lakh crore on August 27, 2021; adjusted for the first-round impact of the change in
`3.5 lakh crore on September 9, 2021; and `4.0 lakh the CRR) while money supply (M3) increased by 9.3
crore on September 24, 2021. These were supported per cent (y-o-y) as on September 24 (Table IV.8).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.36: Variable Rate Reverse Repo Auctions
a: 10-year G-sec Yield: Intra-day Movement on b: Bid-Cover Ratios
August 7, 2021
Source: RBI, and Bloomberg
Other Liquidity Measures
Table IV.8: Key Banking and Monetary Aggregates
in H1:2021-22 Apart from G-SAP, the RBI continued with measures
Indicator Variation (in ` Crore ) to meet targeted sectoral credit needs to nurture the
Financial Year Y-o-Y nascent economic recovery in H1. These measures
2020-21 2021-22 2020-21 2021-22 included (i) special refinance facilities of `66,000 crore
Reserve money 1,59,682 59,318 4,01,195 4,69,910
to all-India financial institutions (AIFIs) comprising
(5.3) (1.6) (14.4) (14.7)
[18.6]* [9.1]* `25,000 crore to the National Bank for Agriculture
Currency in circulation 2,35,646 71,261 4,96,810 2,42,067
(9.6) (2.5) (22.7) (9.0) and Rural Development (NABARD); `10,000 crore to
Broad money (M3) 9,39,801 5,47,546 19,25,597 16,52,360 the National Housing Bank (NHB); and `31,000 crore
(5.6) (2.9) (12.2) (9.3)
to the Small Industries Development Bank of India
Aggregate deposits 6,94,911 4,81,525 13,55,943 13,32,634
(5.1) (3.2) (10.5) (9.3) (SIDBI) to support and nurture the recovery; (ii) term
Demand deposits -40,943 -38,221 1,67,175 2,46,911
liquidity facility of `50,000 crore to ramp up COVID-
(-2.5) (-2.1) (11.9) (15.7)
Time deposits 7,35,854 5,19,746 11,88,768 10,85,722 related healthcare infrastructure and services in
(6.2) (3.9) (10.3) (8.6)
the country; (iii) special long-term repo operations
Bank credit -99,280 7,283 5,04,727 6,85,211
(-1.0) (0.1) (5.2) (6.7) (SLTRO) for small finance banks (SFBs) of `10,000
*: Growth rates adjusted for the first-round impact of the change in CRR. crore to be deployed for fresh lending of up to `10
Note: 1. Figures in parentheses indicate percentage change.
2. Data on deposits and bank credit pertains to scheduled lakh per borrower; (iv) on-tap liquidity window of
commercial banks (SCBs).
`15,000 crore in order to mitigate the adverse impact

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
of the second wave of the pandemic on certain
Table IV.9: Liquidity Measures since
contact-intensive sectors13. Overall, the Reserve
February 6, 2020
(As on September 30, 2021) Bank has announced liquidity enhancing measures
Measure Announced Amount (` crore) worth `17.2 lakh crore (8.7 per cent of nominal GDP of
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 Overall 2020-21) since February 6, 2020 (Table IV.9).
(1) (2) (3) (4 =1+2+3)
IV.4 Conclusion
LTRO 2,00,000 2,00,000
Variable rate repo 1,75,000 50,000 2,25,000 Domestic financial markets broadly remained stable
SLF for PDs 7,200 7,200 and in sync with the accommodative policy stance of
CRR cut 1,37,000 1,37,000
the MPC and the Reserve Bank’s continued calibrated
MSF (dip by additional 1% 1,37,000 1,37,000
in SLR) liquidity injection measures. Market activity was
TLTRO 25,000 75,000 1,00,000 vibrant, with short-term rates easing appreciably along
TLTRO (2.0) 50,000 50,000
with thinning of spreads. The renewed vigour of capital
Net OMO purchases 40,000 1,10,000 2,20,000 3,70,000
including G-SAP inflows and the infusion of discretionary liquidity
Special liquidity facility for 50,000 50,000
through G-SAP resulted in a substantial increase in
mutual funds
surplus systemic liquidity, which was modulated
Refinance to NABARD, SIDBI, 75,000 66,000 1,41,000
NHB and EXIM Bank
through increases in VRRR amounts and fine-tuning
Special liquidity scheme for 30,000 30,000
NBFCs operations. Monetary transmission improved further
56-day term repo 1,00,000 1,00,000 amidst nascent signs of an upturn in credit growth.
On Tap TLTRO 1,00,000 1,00,000
Going forward, liquidity conditions are expected to
SLTRO for small finance banks 10,000 10,000
continue to be accommodative in consonance with the
Term liquidity facility to ease
access to emergency health 50,000 50,000 monetary policy stance, through calibrated liquidity
services
management operations. Imparting momentum to the
On-tap liquidity window for
15,000 15,000
contact-intensive sectors nascent economic recovery process and putting it on
Total 7,21,200 6,40,000 3,61,000 17,22,200
a sustained and durable basis through efficient policy
As per cent of nominal GDP
8.7
for 2020-21 transmission would continue to assume primacy in
Source: RBI the hierarchy of policy objectives.
13 As an incentive, banks were permitted to park their surplus liquidity up to the size of the loan book created under this scheme with the Reserve Bank
under the reverse repo window at a rate which is 25 bps lower than the repo rate i.e., 40 bps higher than the reverse repo rate.

Chapter V External Environment
V. External Environment
The global economic activity gained traction in Q2:2021 (April-June). In Q3, however, the momentum of the
global recovery seems to have weakened across the board as the rapid spread of more virulent strains of the virus
weighed on business conditions. Elevated commodity prices and overstretched supply chains are keeping input price
pressures high, posing upside risks to headline inflation. The divergence in monetary policy actions and stances is
amplifying the unequal and uneven nature of the global recovery and increasing the downside risks to the outlook,
while global financial markets are turning volatile.
In the aftermath of the April 2021 MPR, daily The US dollar has strengthened in anticipation of
new infections appeared to have peaked in major taper and higher inflation outcomes in the US.
advanced economies (AEs) and a few emerging market
V.1 Global Economic Conditions
economies (EMEs), allowing easing of restrictions and
Economic activity accelerated in major AEs and EMEs
global economic activity to gain traction in Q2:2021
in Q2:2021, but faltered in Q3, with most economies
at a diverging and unequal pace on the basis of scale
yet to return to their pre-pandemic levels. In the US,
and speed of vaccination. Starting June, however,
the economic rebound that commenced in H2:2020
the momentum of the global recovery seems to have
continued into H1:2021, with GDP bouncing back
weakened across the board as the rapid spread of
to its pre-pandemic level in Q2:2021 (Table V.1).
more virulent strains of the virus weighed on business
Sustained policy support, easing of restrictions and
conditions in most major economies, pulling down
vaccination supported a strong pick-up in consumer
global purchasing managers’ index (PMI) readings and
is likely to reflect in lower GDP growth in Q3. Besides, spending. Non-farm payroll showed signs of steady
still rising commodity prices and overstretched supply improvement during May-July indicating the mending
chains are keeping input price pressures high, posing of labour market conditions; however, it softened in
upside risks to headline inflation. Several EME central August to a seven-month low amidst rising infections.
banks and a few in the AEs have responded with Employment remains below the pre-pandemic level
policy rate hikes and unwinding of policy stimulus. and the Federal Reserve (Fed)’s goal of maximum
The divergence in monetary policy actions and stances employment, beset with hiring difficulties and labour
is amplifying the unequal and uneven nature of the supply shortages. Incoming data for Q3 also suggest
global recovery and increasing the downside risks to that the momentum of growth may have moderated
the outlook. – consumer sentiment plummeted in August to its
lowest level in nearly a decade due to surging delta
Global financial markets remained buoyant up to
variant infections and inflation concerns, before rising
early-September before increasingly turning volatile.
marginally in September. The manufacturing PMI
Even as stock markets in a few countries scaled fresh
eased in July due to persistent supply side frictions
peaks in September 2021, most saw sharp correction.
but improved in the next two months even as the
In the bond markets, yields remained range-bound up
rising infections caseload weighed on the outlook.
to August in most AEs but rose sharply in September.
In EMEs, bond yields moved bi-directionally but rose After slipping into a double dip recession in Q1:2021,
in the latter part of September, in sync with the AEs. the Euro area rebounded sharply in Q2, growing at

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
manufacturing PMI, while services PMI fell to a four-
Table V.1: Real GDP Growth
(Per cent) month low in September.
Country Q2- Q3- Q4- Q1- Q2- 2020 2021 2022
2020 2020 2020 2021 2021 (P) (P) The Japanese economy picked up in Q2 at a pace higher
Quarter-over-quarter, seasonally adjusted, annualised rate than expected, but much weaker than other major
(Q-o-q, SAAR)
AE peers. Resilient external demand underpinned a
Canada -38.0 41.7 9.3 5.5 -1.1 - - -
recovery in exports and capital expenditure. In Q3,
Euro area -39.1 60.9 -1.7 -1.1 9.2 - - -
Japan -28.1 23.2 11.9 -4.2 1.9 - - - however, the country is less likely to maintain this
UK -58.1 90.2 4.5 -5.3 23.9 - - -
momentum as the upsurge in cases of more virulent
US -31.2 33.8 4.5 6.3 6.7 - - -
strains pushed the economy into its fourth state of
Year-on-year (Y-o-y)
Advanced Economies emergency in early July which was extended till
Canada -12.6 -5.1 -3.1 0.3 12.7 -5.3 6.3 4.5 September. The fallout from the renewed wave is
Euro area -14.5 -4.0 -4.4 -1.2 14.3 -6.5 4.6 4.3
already getting reflected in incoming data as industrial
Japan -10.1 -5.5 -0.9 -1.3 7.6 -4.7 2.8 3.0
UK -21.4 -8.1 -7.1 -5.8 23.6 -9.8 7.0 4.8 growth turned weaker in July and August and the
US -9.1 -2.9 -2.3 0.5 12.2 -3.5 7.0 4.9 manufacturing PMI, though in expansion zone,
Emerging Market Economies
moderated in Q3. The composite PMI remained in
Brazil -10.9 -3.9 -1.1 1.0 12.4 -4.1 5.3 1.9
contraction zone up to September, reflecting a sharp
China 3.2 4.9 6.5 18.3 7.9 2.3 8.1 5.7
India -24.4 -7.4 0.5 1.6 20.1 -7.3 9.5 8.5 deterioration in business activity in the services
Indonesia -5.3 -3.5 -2.2 -0.7 7.1 -2.1 3.9 5.9
sector.
Philippines -17.0 -11.6 -8.3 -3.9 11.8 -9.6 5.4 7.0
Russia -7.8 -3.5 -1.8 -0.7 10.5 -3.0 4.4 3.1
In the UK, GDP grew sharply in Q2:2021 – as against a
South Africa -16.8 -5.8 -3.5 -2.6 19.3 -7.0 4.0 2.2
contraction in Q1 – as the gradual rollback of COVID-
Thailand -12.1 -6.4 -4.2 -2.6 7.5 -6.1 2.1 6.1
Memo: 2020 2021 (P) 2022 (P) related restrictions together with rapid vaccine rollouts
World Output -3.2 6.0 4.9 aided a strong rebound in household consumption and
World Trade -8.3 9.7 7.0
public spending. With increasing caseload intensifying
Volume
the risk of another round of lockdown restrictions,
P: Projection.
Note: India's data correspond to fiscal year (April-March). the pace of recovery slowed in Q3. The composite PMI
Sources: Official statistical agencies; Bloomberg; IMF WEO Update,
July 2021; and RBI staff estimates. eased for the fourth consecutive month in September
as output growth in both manufacturing and services
weakened amidst stringent supply constraints.
9.2 per cent [q-o-q, seasonally adjusted annualised
The Chinese economy expanded by 7.9 per cent (y-o-y)
rate (SAAR)], as most major constituent economies
in Q2. Successful containment of several sporadic
returned to growth following gradual withdrawal
of restrictions. Significant progress on vaccination, virus outbreaks together with sustained policy
together with falling rates of incidence, boosted measures kept exports and manufacturing activity
consumer and business sentiments, and brightened well supported, thus powering a steady recovery.
the prospects for domestic demand and employment. Domestic consumption, however, remains a weak
In Q3, however, the economy seems to have lost some spot and the economy exhibited signs of slowing
steam, as evident from high frequency indicators. down in Q3. Both manufacturing and services PMI
The composite PMI, though in strong expansion, slipped back into contraction in August for the first
moderated in August and September from its 15-year time since April 2020 following the deterioration in
high in July, as capacity constraints dragged on the business conditions. In September, manufacturing

Chapter V External Environment
PMI had the neutral reading of 50, i.e., neither paced up vaccination having boosted sentiments.
expansion nor contraction. The deterioration in real Manufacturing PMI moderated in August but picked
estate, rising input costs, regulatory crackdown on up in September, with production rising for the fifth
corporates in recent months and growing power successive month owing to a robust expansion in
outages are the major headwinds. sales.
An examination of key macroeconomic indicators of The Russian economy remained resilient with GDP
BRICS economies reveals that the macroeconomic having reached its pre-pandemic level in Q2:2021.
performance of India is likely to remain resilient in A sustained recovery in consumer spending and
2021 when compared with most other counterparts investment demand supported the uptrend, while
(Table V.2). elevated commodity prices and the gradual recovery
The Brazilian economy contracted marginally on q-o-q of oil output lent further support. Some slowing
basis in Q2:2021, reversing three successive quarters of momentum is evident in Q3 as a third wave of
of sequential expansion since Q3:2020. Contraction infections since end-June impacted both domestic
in both industry and agricultural sectors on account and foreign demand conditions leading to a decline in
of the resurgence of COVID-19 infections, weighed production and slowdown in new order growth. The
on economic activity. On the demand side, a sharp manufacturing PMI is back into the contraction zone
decline in gross fixed capital investment, together with since June, while the composite PMI recorded its first
muted household consumption, led to the downturn. contraction since December 2020 in August but was
In Q3, indicators are pointing to mobility gains, with back in expansion zone in September.
Table V.2: Select Macroeconomic Indicators for BRICS
Real GDP growth Country 2020 2021(P) 2022(P) General Govt. Country 2020 2021(P) 2022(P)
rate (per cent) Brazil -4.1 5.3 1.9 gross debt (as Brazil# 98.9 91.8 98.8
per cent of GDP)
Russia -3.0 4.4 3.1 Russia 19.3 18.0 17.7
India -7.3 9.5 8.5 India 89.4 90.1 86.3
China 2.3 8.1 5.7 China 66.3 70.3 73.7
South Africa -7.0 4.0 2.2 South Africa 77.1 77.5 84.4
CPI inflation rate Country 2020 2021(P) 2022(P) Current account Country 2020 (P) 2021(P) 2022(P)
(per cent) Brazil 3.2 4.6 4.0 balance (as per Brazil -0.9 -0.6 -0.8
cent of GDP)
Russia 3.4 4.5 3.4 Russia 2.2 3.9 3.3
India 6.1 @ 4.9 4.1 India 1.0 -1.2 -1.6
China 2.4 1.2 1.9 China 2.0 1.6 1.3
South Africa 3.3 4.3 4.5 South Africa 2.2 -0.4 -1.5
General Govt. net Country 2020 (P) 2021(P) 2022(P) Forex reserves* Country 2020 2021
lending/borrowing Brazil -13.4 -8.3 -7.2 (in US$ billion) Brazil 355.6 370.4
(as per cent of
Russia -4.1 -0.8 -0.3 Russia 596.1 618.2
GDP)
India -12.3 -10.0 -9.1 India 588.4 633.6
China -11.4 -9.6 -8.7 China 3536.0 3588.1
South Africa -12.2 -10.6 -8.3 South Africa 54.2 58.3
P: Projection.
*: Forex reserves for 2021 pertain to August 2021.
#: Gross debt refers to the nonfinancial public sector, excluding Eletrobras and Petrobras, and includes sovereign debt held by the central bank.
@: Average of the period from June 2020 to March 2021.
Note: India's data correspond to fiscal year (April-March).
Sources: Bloomberg; Official statistical agencies; WEO April 2021 database and July 2021 Update; and IRFCL, IMF.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
The South African economy has exhibited gradual The OECD composite leading indicators (CLIs)
recovery with four consecutive quarters of q-o-q available up to August 2021 suggest moderate
improvement just above trend level across most
expansion up to Q2:2021. The recovery was
major AEs, while for major EMEs it reflects diverging
underpinned by strong growth in transport and
developments (Chart V.1a). The global composite PMI
communication, personal services and the agricultural
has moderated within the expansion zone, hitting a
sector, while household spending and exports lent
7-month low in August, before rising marginally in
support. In Q3, however, the pace of growth is likely to
September with PMI manufacturing remaining flat
have decelerated as social unrest, mounting infections, (Chart V.1b).
slow vaccine rollouts and power outages weakened
Global trade showed signs of revival during Q4:2020
business conditions as also domestic demand.
and recovered swiftly during H1:2021 across AEs and
Among the South-East Asian economies, recovery EMEs (Chart V.2a). Following the recent resurgence in
global trade, the WTO has revised its growth forecast
remains slow-paced with renewed waves of contagious
of merchandise trade volume to 10.8 per cent for
strains of COVID-19 amidst lagged inoculation rates.
2021. However, persisting worldwide shortages in
Stringent containment measures have resulted
semiconductors and port congestion may moderate
in deterioration of business conditions, pushing
global trade recovery in certain sectors (Box V.1). The
manufacturing PMI for all major ASEAN economies
Baltic Dry Index, which measures shipping costs for
into contraction territory in August, for the first time a wide variety of bulk commodities such as coal, iron
since May 2020. The PMI manufacturing for the ASEAN ore and grain, rose to a new high by end-September
region was at the neutral level of 50 in September. (Chart V.2b).
Chart V.1: High Frequency Indicators
a: OECD CLIs b: Composite PMI
Sources: OECD; and Bloomberg.

Chapter V External Environment
Box V.1: Global Semiconductor Shortage: Opportunities and Challenges
The world is currently facing an acute shortage of incentives to scale up their domestic semiconductor
semiconductors, which is the fourth most traded item manufacturing capacity (Chart V.1.1b). Furthermore,
globally after crude oil, refined oil and cars (BCG-SIA leading semiconductor manufacturers like TSMC and
Report, 2021). The global semiconductor market is valued Intel have also planned huge capital expenditure to the
at US$440 billion accounting for around 5 per cent of tune of US$100 billion and US$43.5 billion, respectively,
global goods trade and is expected to grow by 25.1 per to tap the elevated demand. The recent investment boom
cent (US$551 billion) in 2021, driven by key segments to meet shortages may lead to overcapacity in the long
such as mobile phones, information and communications run.
technology (ICT) infrastructure, personal computers,
The semiconductor industry is at the core of India’s
industrial applications, consumer electronics and
digital transformation into a US$1 trillion digital
automobiles (Chart V.1.1a). The buoyant demand for
economy by 2025. The size of the world market for 111
electronic gadgets, cloud computing solutions and auto frontier technologies is expected to increase to US$3.2
industry following COVID-19 pandemic led to a huge trillion by 2025 (UNCTAD, 2021) and drive the demand
supply-demand mismatch in the semiconductor industry, for semiconductors in future. Moreover, the share of
causing production delays and inflationary pressures software-related automotive electronics in car industry is
across segments forcing companies to reinvent their estimated to increase from 27 per cent in 2010 to 45 per
supply chains. Alix Partners (2021) estimates that the cent by 2030 (Deloitte, 2019).
ongoing semiconductor shortage may lead to revenue
The semiconductor industry is highly capital-intensive
loss of around US$210 billion in 2021 in the automotive
with a long gestation period. Annual energy requirements
sector. According to Gartner (2021), normalcy is expected
to run large fabrication facilities are estimated at around
to return to semiconductor industry by the second quarter
169 MWh, sufficient to power an Indian city (Kumar, 2021).
of 2022.
Moreover, it requires on average 2-4 million gallons of ultra-
Realising critical geo-political concerns associated with pure water daily (Baskaran, 2017). Furthermore, wastage
semiconductor industry, countries are offering huge disposal associated with semiconductor industry is also
Chart V.1.1: Snapshot of Global Semiconductor Industry
a. Semiconductors Demand by End Use (2019, Per cent) b. Domestic Support to Semiconductor Industry by
Major Economies
*: The incentives for South Korea and the European Union are estimated at US$55-65 billion (over three years) and US$20-35 billion (over ten years), respectively. The financial
incentive for China is for ten years.
Sources: SIA-BCG Report and various SIA releases.
(Contd.)
1 Artificial intelligence, internet of things, big data, blockchain, 5G, 3D printing, robotics, drone, gene editing, nanotechnology and solar photovoltaic.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
capital intensive and raises environmental concerns. The
semiconductor industry is also highly cyclical in nature
and determined by two variables, namely semiconductor
where is defined as the growth rate of worldwide
inventory and fabrication plant capacity (Liu W. H., 2005).
semiconductor sales. The equations (1) - (5) represent the
Using a Markov regime-switching model, the expected model set up as an AR (4) process where stands
duration of an expansionary cycle (8 months) is obtained for expansion of the semiconductor industry and
as twice that of a contractionary phase (4 months) (Liu stands for contraction of the semiconductor industry.
and Chyi, 2006). We extend that line of analysis to the The transition probability from expansion to expansion
period September 2003 to June 2021 with the following (i.e., from to ) is defined as p. On the
empirical specification: other hand, the transition probability from contraction to
contraction ( to ) is defined as q.
The empirical results suggest that the expected duration
of expansion and contraction in the semiconductor
industry is around 16 months and 4 months, respectively.
The higher expansionary period reflects the increasing
demand for semiconductors across industries post
COVID-19 (Charts V.1.2a and V.1.2b).
Chart V.1.2: Semiconductor Industry
a. Growth Rate of Worldwide Semiconductor Sales
(3-month Moving Average Seasonally Adjusted)
b. Probability of Semiconductor Industry Being in Contraction
Probability of the semiconductor industry being in contraction with initial p=0.5, q=0.5
Sources: World Semiconductor Trade Statistics; and RBI staff estimates.
(Contd.)

Chapter V External Environment
Given the renewed focus on digitalisation and increasing Select References
domestic demand for electronic goods with large
Kumar, M. J. (2021). Is India going to be a major hub of
import dependency, the government has initiated the
semiconductor chip manufacturing? IETE Technical
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme and Scheme for
Reviews, 279-281.
Promotion of Manufacturing of Electronic Components
and Semiconductors (SPECS) to encourage its domestic Liu, W. H. (2005). Determinants of the semiconductor
production. Incentives in line with those provided by industry cycles. Journal of Policy Modelling, 27 (2005),
major countries would help develop semiconductor 853-866.
fabrication facilities in India. Fiscal incentives and
Liu, W.H., & Chyi, Y.L. (2006). A Markov regime-switching
provision of adequate infrastructure like uninterrupted
model for the semiconductor industry cycles. Economic
supply of electricity and ultra-pure water could contribute
Modelling, 23 (2006), 569-578.
to India’s emergence as a major player in this industry
UNCTAD. (2021). Technology and Innovation Report.
and provide a conducive environment for the hardware
segment to complement the software industry.
V.2 Commodity Prices and Inflation of seasonal production gains and softening import
demand. In contrast, sugar and meat prices have
Global commodity prices have soared in 2021 so
continued to increase due to tightening supplies from
far, with intermittent corrections – the Bloomberg
major exporters amidst rising import demand.
commodity price index increased by 20.7 per cent
during April-September 2021. The food price index Crude oil prices rallied unevenly since April on
of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) improved demand prospects. Brent crude crossed
increased by 7.0 per cent between March and August US$70 per barrel in June, reaching its then highest
2021 (Chart V.3a). Prices of vegetable oil, cereal and level of 2021 in early July. From the second week
dairy sub-indices have eased more recently because of July, however, crude oil prices turned volatile –
Chart V.2: World Trade Volume
a: World Trade Volume: Relative Contribution b: Movement in World Trade Volume and
Baltic Dry Index
Sources: CPB Netherlands; and CEIC.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart V.3: Commodity Prices
a: Food Price Indices b: Energy and Crude Oil Prices
Sources: Food and Agriculture Organization; and World Bank.
downward bias was imparted by rapid spread of the prices rose in April and May on strong safe haven
contagious delta variant, OPEC plus agreement to ease demand, but lost sheen in June on account of a strong
supply with an additional output of 400,000 barrels US dollar. After remaining range-bound around
per day each month from August and rising stockpiles the psychological level of US$1,800 per troy ounce
in the US. Price have firmed up since the latter part during July to early September, prices plummeted in
of August on tightening US supplies owing to slow
September with sharp rise in the US treasury yields
recovery from disruption caused by Hurricane Ida and
and the US dollar.
lower stockpiles in China. Brent crude prices ruled at
nearly three-year highs at end-September, surging by
Chart V.4: Metal Price Indices
54.0 per cent on year-to-date basis.
Base metal prices measured by the Bloomberg’s
base metal spot index increased by 11.4 per cent
during April-September 2021. The strong rally in
prices witnessed in Q1:2021 continued into the
first half of Q2 (Chart V.4). Most industrial metals,
including copper and iron peaked in mid-May.
The steady recovery in manufacturing activity
across most major economies, along with rising
supply bottlenecks, underpinned the metals bull
run of H1:2021, sparking a debate on potential
emergence of a fresh commodity super-cycle
(Box V.2). Thereafter, prices for most metals have
turned volatile in Q3, with iron giving up all early
Source: Bloomberg.
gains following China’s pro-climate measures. Gold

Chapter V External Environment
Box V.2: Global Commodity Prices: Is a Super Cycle Forming?
Global commodity markets have picked up momentum Fitzgerald band-pass (BP) filter was deployed to decompose
in 2021, with a 69.4 per cent increase in the Bloomberg real metal prices (RP) into three components2: a long term
commodity price index from the low of March 2020 (Chart trend (RP_LTT); a super cycle component (RP_SC); and
V.2.1a). Metal prices have remained the frontrunner in other relatively shorter cyclical components (RP_STC)
the recovery (Chart V.2.1b). Prices of iron and tin surged such that:
to historic peaks, while copper and aluminium recorded
over a decadal high as recovering demand was further
propelled by speculative trading. In line with Heap’s (2005) analysis, a super cycle ranges
from 20 to 70 years and, therefore, a BP (20,70) filter has
Super cycles are long-period cycles with periods of price
been applied on each price series to obtain its super cycle
upswings of roughly 10-35 years, and are generally
component. The long run trend is defined as a cyclical
perceived to be broad-based, affecting a wide range of
component with periods above 70 years and is extracted
commodities (Heap, 2005). They are rare but long-lasting.
using a BP (70,(cid:102)) filter3, while short-term cyclical
Such elongated cycles are attributed to structural shifts in
components are defined as cycles with periods of 2 to 20
the economy, characterised by prolonged period of strong
years and extracted by using BP (2,20) filter.
demand outpacing supply. Three demand-driven super
cycles have occurred since the late 19th century: during the The results corroborate the occurrence of three super
US industrialisation which began in late 1800s through cycles since the late 1800s (Chart V.2.2). Moreover,
early 1900s; reconstruction in Europe and Japan in the the super cycles in the six metals under consideration
aftermath of the second world war; and the most recent have strong contemporaneous correlation, except for
one driven by rapid industrialisation and urbanisation of aluminium-lead and aluminium-zinc (Table V.2.1).
China beginning in the early 2000s (Jerrett, 2021).
The super-cycle component of each of these metals,
Following Cuddington and Jerrett (2008), the statistical barring aluminium and nickel, peaked around 2014-
filtering technique of an asymmetric Christiano and 2016 though they remain above their long-term trend.
Chart V.2.1: Commodity Market Developments
a: Bloomberg Commodity Index b: Commodity Price Indices (Monthly)
Sources: Bloomberg; and World Bank.
(Contd.)
2 The ACF BP filter has been applied to the natural logarithm of annual real metal prices of six non-ferrous metals, viz. copper, aluminium, lead, zinc,
nickel and tin for the period 1900 to 2021. The annual prices from 1960 onwards are sourced from the World Bank. For prior period, back-casting is done
by using the US Geological Survey (USGS) data. For 2021, the average of the monthly real prices (nominal prices deflated by the US CPI) from January to
July is considered.
3 Long term trend can also be defined as the actual series minus all the cyclical components with periods between 2 and 70 years (i.e., both super-cycle
and other shorter cyclical components) and thus BP (2,70) and BP (70, (cid:102)) can be treated as complements.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart V.2.2: Real Price Components- Base Metals
a: Copper b: Aluminium c: Lead
d: Zinc e: Nickel f: Tin
Sources: World Bank; USGS database; and RBI staff estimates.
it is too early to classify the ongoing broad-based price
Table V.2.1: Correlations between Super-Cycle
escalation as a new commodity super cycle.
Components of Real Prices
References:
Aluminium Copper Lead Tin Nickel Zinc
Christiano, L. and T. Fitzgerald, 2003, ‘‘The Band Pass
Aluminium 1.00
Filter,’’ International Economic Review, Vol. 44, No. 2,
Copper 0.32* 1.00
Lead -0.00 0.74* 1.00 May, pp. 435-465.
Tin 0.35* 0.56* 0.73* 1.00
Cuddington, J.T. and D. Jerrett, 2008, “Super Cycles in
Nickel 0.81* 0.61* 0.47* 0.50* 1.00
Real Metals Prices?”, IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 55, No. 4,
Zinc -0.07 0.67* 0.71* 0.60* 0.26* 1.00
December, pp. 541-565.
*: Statistically significant at 1 per cent level.
Source: RBI staff estimates. Heap, A., 2005, “China - the Engine of a Commodities
Super Cycle,” Equities Research: Global, Citigroup Smith
This suggests that commodities might still be in the
Barney, March 31.
downswing phase of the super cycle that began in early
Jerrett, D., 2021, “How Super is the Commodity Cycle?”,
2000s. In contrast, the shorter cycle components for all
Global Commodities Applied Research Digest, Summer
metals are showing an upturn, likely reflecting supply-side
2021, http://www.jpmcc-gcard.com/digest-uploads/2021-
factors such as escalating transport and logistics frictions
summer/Page%2074_79%20GCARD%20Summer%20
and costs. Moreover, the recent reversal in prices of some
2021%20Jerrett%20042021.pdf.
metals weakens the narrative of a new super cycle. Hence,

Chapter V External Environment
Prices firmed up across major AEs, pushing inflation seen since the global financial crisis. Fed’s preferred
above targets for most of them, barring Japan (Table measure of inflation, the personal consumer
V.3). For major EMEs, barring Indonesia and Thailand, expenditures (PCE) inflation, lagged CPI inflation
headline inflation has remained close to the upper but was at 30-year high level during July-August due
bound of the official target band or beyond, while for to high energy and food prices. The surge in pent-
China, inflationary pressures have remained subdued up demand following the re-opening of economy,
in terms of consumer prices, notwithstanding strong persistent supply-side constraints and high input costs
upside pressures from producer prices. are lending upside to inflation. The Fed attributes the
spike in inflation to transitory factors. In the Euro
The return of inflation in the US has been stark.
area, the inflation rate moved beyond the European
CPI inflation hit a 13-year high, reaching levels not
Central Bank (ECB)’s target of 2 per cent, surging to
a 13-year high of 3.4 per cent in September on rising
Table V.3: Inflation
(Per cent) energy costs and prices of non-energy industrial
goods and services, besides unfavourable base effect.
Country Inflation Q3:2020 Q4:2020 Q1:2021 Q2:2021 Q3:2021
Target The ECB too, attributes the recent rise in inflation to
(current)
transitory factors and expects it to moderate back to
Advanced Economies
the target once pandemic-induced shocks wane. CPI
Canada 2.0 0.2 0.8 1.4 3.4 3.9
Euro area 2.0 0.0 -0.3 1.0 1.8 2.9 inflation in the UK edged up above the target in May-
Japan 2.0 0.2 -0.8 -0.5 -0.8 -0.4
June and eased back to the 2 per cent target in July.
South Korea 2.0 0.7 0.4 1.1 2.4 2.6
In August, however, the inflation rate soared to 3.2
UK 2.0 0.6 0.5 0.6 2.0 2.6
US 2.0 1.2 1.2 1.8 3.9 4.2 per cent, the highest ever jump in rate, mainly due
Emerging Market Economies to an unfavourable base effect. In Japan, unlike its
Brazil 3.75 ± 1.5 2.6 4.3 5.3 7.7 9.3 AE counterparts, CPI remained in deflation for the
Russia 4.0 3.6 4.4 5.6 6.0 6.6
eleventh consecutive month in August as COVID-19
India 4.0 ± 2.0 6.9 6.4 4.9 5.6 5.4
continued to impact demand, keeping core inflation
China - 2.3 0.1 0.0 1.1 0.9
South Africa 3.0-6.0 3.1 3.2 3.1 4.8 4.8 subdued, while a sharp drop in monthly mobile phone
Indonesia 3.0 ± 1.0 1.4 1.6 1.4 1.5 1.6
charges added to the downside (Chart V.5a).
Philippines 3.0 ± 1.0 2.5 3.1 4.5 4.4 4.6
Thailand 1.0-3.0 -0.7 -0.4 -0.5 2.4 0.7 Among major EMEs, CPI inflation in Brazil has
Turkey 5.0 ± 2.0 11.8 13.5 15.6 17.1 19.3
been above the upper bound of the tolerance band
Notes: (1) Inflation for US is in terms of personal consumption
around the inflation target since February 2021. In
expenditure price index.
(2) Quarterly inflation is the simple average of inflation in each August, CPI inflation rose to its highest reading since
month of the quarter. For Q3:2021, it is the July-August average
for all countries except Euro area, South Korea, Indonesia, February 2016, primarily led by a surge in electricity
Phillipines, Thailand and Turkey, for which it is full quarter
and fuel prices amidst supply disruptions brought
average.
(3) The ECB adopted new monetary policy strategy from July 8, in by the worst drought witnessed by the country
2021 under which a symmetric 2 per cent inflation would be
targeted over the medium term unlike the earlier target of in almost a century. High global commodity prices,
“below but close to 2 per cent’. The Bank of Canada aims to
the depreciating Brazilian real and reviving demand
keep inflation at the 2 per cent mid-point of an inflation control
target range of 1-3 per cent. are imparting upward pressure on prices. In Russia,
(4) Brazil’s inflation target for 2020 was 4.0 ± 1.5 per cent.
Sources: Central bank websites; and Bloomberg. inflation has been above the official target level since

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart V.5: CPI Inflation (y-o-y) – Select Economies
a: Advanced Economies b: Emerging Market Economies
Sources Bloomberg.
November 2020, scaling to a five-year high in August V.3 Monetary Policy Stance
as rising inflation expectations, recovery in demand
Extraordinary policy measures by monetary and
and strained supply capacity have kept inflationary
fiscal authorities continue to support economies
pressures elevated. In South Africa, CPI inflation
and ease financial conditions, helping to contain
picked up from April due to increase in fuel costs,
financial stability risks. The IMF estimates that
and high food and beverage prices. In June-July, since March 2020, US$16.5 trillion or about 15.9
however, inflation eased due to softening transport per cent of global GDP had been pledged as fiscal
prices and favourable base effect before rising again support in response to the pandemic, with higher
in August on high fuel and food prices. China, support extended by AEs vis-à-vis the EMEs
on the other hand, remains an outlier with CPI (Table V.4). While most of the fiscal measures in the
inflation remaining highly subdued, primarily EMEs had expired in 2020, almost US$4.6 trillion
due to decline in food prices as also easing costs worth of measures remain available to AEs as of early
of transportation and communication amidst July 2021.
weak services sector demand (Chart V.5b). China’s
The total monetary support extended globally by
producer price index, however, has risen sharply, central banks is estimated to be about US$18.0
pushing factory-gate inflation to its highest level in trillion as of August 20214. This support has been
13 years in August as high raw material costs and predominantly in the form of asset purchases, around
persistent disruptions due to global supply shortages US$11.6 trillion, followed by lending operations of
exert upward pressure. US$4.4 trillion.
4 These are RBI staff estimates, based on BIS database available on https://www.bis.org/publ/work934.htm. This database is for 39 major economies – 11
AEs and 28 EMEs and numerical estimates for several measures listed are not available. As such the estimate might not fully reflect the policies taken by
these central banks in response to COVID-19.

Chapter V External Environment
initially a temporary facility introduced in end-March
Table V.4: Fiscal Support in Response to COVID-19
2020 and extended up to September 2021 – is now
(Amount in US$ billion; Per cent as proportion of GDP)
a permanent facility. The September Federal Open
Country Amount Per cent
Market Committee (FOMC) statement noted that if
Advanced Economies - 28.7
of which, the progress towards its maximum employment and
Canada 326 19.8
inflation goals continued as expected, a moderation in
European Union 1,361 10.5
the pace of asset purchases would be warranted soon.
Japan 2,260 44.8
UK 893 33.0 The FOMC also doubled the per-counterparty limit for
US 5,838 27.9
ON RRP operations to US$160 billion per day, effective
Emerging Market Economies - 6.7
of which, September 23, 2021.
Brazil 221 15.4
The ECB maintained a hold on its policy rate and
Russia 89 6.0
India 232 8.7 the quantum of asset purchases in its meetings in
China 903 6.1
April and June. On July 8, the ECB unveiled its new
South Africa 30 9.9
monetary policy strategy under which a symmetric
World 16,500 15.9
Source: World Economic Outlook Update, July 2021, IMF. 2 per cent inflation target was adopted, as against
the earlier target of below but close to 2 per cent.
Monetary policy stances have diverged across
The Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)
countries, with a few major AEs and EMEs continuing
remains the measure of the price level5 and the
to maintain an accommodative stance while others
primary monetary policy instrument is the set of
have begun/continued with the withdrawal of
ECB policy rates. With the policy rates ruling close
monetary stimulus.
to their effective lower bound, the ECB would likely
The US Fed maintained the target range for the resort to other instruments such as forward guidance,
federal funds rate at 0 to 0.25 per cent and the asset purchases, longer-term refinancing operations
monthly pace of asset purchases at US$120 billion in and other new policy instruments as required. As
all its meetings held in Q2 and Q3. In June, the Fed part of the strategy review, the ECB also announced
effected a hike of 5 basis points (bps) in the interest a detailed roadmap up to 2024 for its comprehensive
rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to action plan on climate change. In its July meeting, the
0.15 per cent. The interest rate on overnight reverse first under the new framework, the ECB maintained
repurchase agreement (ON RRP) operations was an accommodative monetary policy stance to meet its
also increased by 5 bps to 0.05 per cent. Effective inflation target and provided forward guidance that
July 29, the Fed merged the interest rates on excess interest rates would remain at their current level or
reserves and required reserves to a single interest lower till the inflation target was durably achieved.
rate on reserve balances. The Fed also announced In its September meeting, the ECB announced a
two standing lending facilities, both overnight and moderately lower pace of asset purchases under the
collateralised, viz., domestic standing repurchase Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme (PEPP),
agreement facility and a repo facility for foreign without reducing the overall quantum of the purchase
and international monetary authorities. The latter – programme that is scheduled to end by March 2022.
5 As a multi-year project, the EU's statistical agency – Eurostat – will lead a project to include costs related to owner-occupied housing in the HICP to
better measure the inflation relevant for households. In the interim, the ECB will also consider initial estimates of the cost of owner-occupied housing in
conjunction with the other broader inflation measures for monetary policy assessment.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
It has kept purchases under the Asset Purchase Central banks of four AEs, viz., Iceland, Czech
Programme (APP) unchanged. Republic, South Korea and Norway have raised their
policy rates in 2021 so far. The central bank of Iceland
The Bank of England (BoE) maintained a pause on the
has effected two hikes of 25 bps each and the Czech
bank rate at its all-time low of 0.1 per cent and kept
National Bank has raised rates thrice to a cumulative
the total quantum of asset purchases unchanged in
increase of 125 bps. Bank of Korea and Norges Bank
its meetings in May, June, August and September. In
its August meeting, the BoE indicated that a modest raised policy rates by 25 bps in August and September,
tightening of monetary policy over its three-year respectively (Chart V.6a).
forecast period is likely and it signalled that, given
Within the EMEs, there has mostly been status quo or
appropriate economic circumstances, it would begin
a move towards unwinding monetary accommodation,
unwinding its quantitative easing by not re-investing
though some countries have extended the stimulus
maturing assets once the bank rate is raised to 0.5 per
also. For instance, the People’s Bank of China (PBoC)
cent6.
increased the liquidity in the system by lowering the
The Bank of Japan (BoJ) in its meetings in April, reserve requirement for most financial institutions
June, July and September kept the monetary policy by 50 bps effective July 15, freeing up about 1 trillion
parameters – the key policy rates and the quantum of yuan (approximately US$154.3 billion) of liquidity to
asset purchases – unchanged. In July, the BoJ sketched support the real economy. The PBoC has, however,
the preliminary outline of the Fund-Provisioning maintained the one-year Loan Prime Rate (LPR) at 3.85
Measure to Support Efforts on Climate Change. The per cent since April 2020.
new measure would come into effect in 2021 under
Amongst other BRICS central banks, Banco Central do
which the BoJ would provide interest-free loans
Brasil followed up on its 75 bps rate action of March
against collateral for up to one year, with possibility
with equal hikes of 75 bps each in May and June and
of rollover, for on-lending to projects that address
100 bps each in August and September. The Bank of
climate change7. Moreover, banks would be allowed
Russia followed up on its 25 bps rate hike of March
to add twice the amount of any borrowing under the
with hikes of 50 bps each in April and June, 100 bps
scheme to their macro add-on balances, which would
in July and 25 bps in September. The South African
earn 0 per cent interest as against the policy rate,
Reserve Bank maintained a pause in its May, July and
which is currently (-) 0.1 per cent.
September meetings.
The Bank of Canada (BoC) maintained its policy
rate and the forward guidance in its meetings in The central bank of Turkey, which had maintained
April, June, July and September but effected tapers status quo since a hike of 200 bps in March 2021,
of CAD$1 billion (approximately US$0.8 billion)8 in cut rates by 100 bps in September attributing high
its weekly purchases of government bonds in the inflation to transitory factors and noting that
April and July meetings, reducing the weekly pace monetary tightening had lowered credit and domestic
of asset purchases to CAD$2 billion (approximately demand. Amongst other EME central banks, Banco
US$1.6 billion). de México hiked rates by 25 bps each in June, August
6 The previous guidance of June 2018 had set a higher threshold of 1.5 per cent.
7 Green loans/bonds, sustainability-linked loans/bonds with performance targets related to efforts on climate change and transition finance.
8 The US$ approximations for all amounts mentioned in another currency in this Chapter are based on the exchange rate (Bloomberg) on the date of
announcement of the measure.

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.6: Policy Rate Changes – Select Economies
a: Advanced Economies b: Emerging Market Economies
Source: Bloomberg.
and September, while the Central Bank of Chile raised seven consecutive months of gains up to August – the
rates by 25 bps in July and 75 bps in August (Chart longest rally since the end of the sovereign debt crisis
V.6b). The central banks of Peru and Hungary have in 2012 – which came to an end in September. Strong
also raised rates in recent months. corporate earnings and the accommodative monetary
policy stance of the ECB had helped keep the markets
V.4 Global Financial Markets
bullish. The UK stock indices rose during Q2 due to
Global financial markets remained buoyant and easy
the rapid pace of vaccination, attractive valuations
financing conditions prevailed; however, volatility
and high dividend yield but have been flat thereafter.
returned to the markets in September. Stock markets
The Nikkei, which was trending down since Q2 as
in a few AEs and EMEs scaled fresh peaks in September
Japan lagged the other three major AEs in its pace of
but slid in most countries. Bond yields, which had vaccination and infection control, rose from the last
remained low up to August, edged up in September week of August due to election fever and increased
due to large sell-offs. The US dollar rallied in the wake pace of vaccination overtaking the US.
of higher inflation and inflation expectations and
EME stock indices had been essaying the fault lines
the Fed announcement on commencement of the US
in global recovery, and trending down since June due
taper in the near future. The EME financial markets,
to the two-speed nature of the recovery, moderation
unlike 2013, did not experience a major upheaval in
of capital flows and rapid spread of the delta variant
Q3 despite taper guidance by the Fed.
of the virus (Chart V.7). The EME stock markets got
Among AEs, the US equity markets continued to scale buffeted in August with China’s regulatory crackdown
a new peak every month in Q2 and Q3, even after the and continued to fall in September on concerns
Fed indication of likely taper. After peaking in early- relating to China and change in monetary policy
September, the US market fell, led by technology stocks, stance of several AEs. Stock markets in EMEs such as
and recorded its first monthly decline since January. India and Russia, however, notched all-time highs in
Among other major AEs, European stock markets had September.

Monetary Policy Report October 2021
Chart V.7: Equity Markets
a. Equity Indices (MSCI) b. Changes in Equity Indices
Source: Bloomberg; and RBI staff estimates.
Bond yields in major AEs trended down in Q2:2021 and BoE, bond yields shot up sharply in most AEs
and remained range-bound in Q3 up to August, led by large sell-offs. In the US, long-term treasury
reflecting the accommodative monetary policy yields, which had risen at a rapid clip in Q1:2021
stance maintained by the Fed, the ECB and the BoJ. in line with rise in inflation expectations, treaded
Also, due to the persistent threat to recovery with down in April-July even as inflation and inflation
rapid spread of the delta variant, the safe haven expectations remained high (Chart V.8a). In August,
demand for government bonds continued. Since however, movements in long-term yields were
the September monetary policy meetings of the Fed more range-bound. Despite the significant rise in
Chart V.8: Bond Yields
a: 10-year Sovereign Bond Yields in Select AEs b: 10-year Sovereign Bond Yields in Select EMEs
Source: Bloomberg.

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.9: Currency Movements and Capital Flows
a: Currency Indices b: Portfolio Flows to EMEs
Source: Bloomberg.
September, the 10-year yield at end-September forecast in March. Nevertheless, overall capital flows
was 25 bps lower than that prevailing at end-March in September were higher than in August due to large
2021. sovereign bond issuances by EMEs (Chart V.9b). The
MSCI Emerging Market Currency Index increased by
Yields in the EMEs moved bi-directionally till August
2.2 per cent in Q2:2021 but declined by 0.9 per cent
– rising in those countries that began normalising
in Q3:2021.
monetary policy, while remaining soft in those with
continued central bank support. EME bond yields V.5 Conclusion
rose in September, in line with the global trend
The multi-speed economic recovery across countries
(Chart V.8b).
is becoming increasingly susceptible to renewed
In currency markets, the US dollar has been bouts of rapid spread of infections. There has been a
strengthening since June 2021 on better economic perceptible slowdown of economic activity across the
prospects for the US as also higher inflation outcomes. globe in recent months, particularly in Asia. Inflation
The dollar rally strengthened in September in remains high across the world, with supply disruptions
expectation of commencement of US taper later in becoming more widespread. There is a risk that above
2021. In contrast, the emerging market currencies target inflation may persist longer than anticipated
have depreciated after peaking in the second week in several economies. The pervading threat of the
of June (Chart V.9a). This was mainly triggered by delta variant has led monetary authorities – that had
retrenchment of capital flows following the release earlier signalled unwinding – to be on hold, while
of the FOMC statement where dot plots suggested incremental inflationary pressures have made others
two likely rate rises in 2023 as against no rate hike signal a sooner unwinding.