Published under Section 45ZM of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
Monetary Policy Report
APRIL 2021
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai
Contents
Chapter I: Macroeconomic Outlook 1
I.1 : Key Developments since the October 2020 MPR 1
I.2 : The Outlook for Inflation 4
I.3 : The Outlook for Growth 6
I.4 : Balance of Risks 11
I.5 : Conclusion 13
Box I.1: Quarterly Projection Model 2.0 7
Chapter II: Prices and Costs 14
II.1 : Consumer Prices 15
II.2 : Drivers of Inflation 16
II.3 : Costs 29
II.4 : Conclusion 31
Box: II.1: CPI Goods and Services: Do they Converge after Shocks? 26
Chapter III: Demand and Output 32
III.1: Aggregate Demand 32
III.2: Aggregate Supply 45
III.3: Conclusion 54
Box III.1: Investment and Financial Conditions 36
Chapter IV: Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions 55
IV.1: Domestic Financial Markets 55
IV.2: Monetary Policy Transmission 68
IV.3: Liquidity Conditions and the Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy 71
IV.4: Conclusion 76
Box IV.1: Announcement Effect of Open Market Operations on Financial Markets 74
Chapter V: External Environment 77
V.1 : Global Economic Conditions 77
V.2 : Commodity Prices and Inflation 81
V.3 : Monetary Policy Stance 83
V.4 : Global Financial Markets 88
V.5 : Conclusion 92
Box V.1: Central Bank Actions to Mitigate Climate Change Risk: Cross-country Experience 85
Box V.2: Financial Markets and Real Economy Disconnect – Bubble or Retreat? 89
i
ABBREVIATIONS
AEs - Advanced Economies CII - Confederation of Indian Industry
AEs - Advance Estimates CLI - Composite Leading Indicator
AL - Agricultural Labourers COVID-19 - Coronavirus Disease 2019
APMC - Agricultural Produce Market CP - Commercial Paper
Committee
CPC - Central Pay Commission
ARCH - Autoregressive Conditional
CPI - Consumer Price Index
Heteroskedasticity
CPI-AL - Consumer Price Index for
AUD - Australian Dollar
Agricultural Labourers
BCB - Banco Central do Brasil
CPI-IW - Consumer Price Index for Industrial
BCD - Basic Customs Duty
Workers
BE - Budget Estimates
CPI-RL - Consumer Price Index for Rural
BEI - Business Expectations Index Labourers
BG - Breusch-Godfrey CRR - Cash Reserve Ratio
BI - Bank Indonesia CU - Capacity Utilisation
BIS - Bank for International Settlements DCA - Department of Consumer Affairs
BoC - Bank of Canada DFM - Dynamic Factor Model
BoE - Bank of England DGCA - Directorate General of Civil Aviation
BoJ - Bank of Japan DGCI&S - Directorate General of Commercial
BoR - Bank of Russia Intelligence and Statistics
bps - Basis Points EC - Error Correction
BRICS - Brazil, Russia, India, China and ECB - European Central Bank
South Africa
ECLGS - Emergency Credit Line Guarantee
CACP - Commission for Agricultural Costs Scheme
and Prices
EMEs - Emerging Market Economies
CBs - Corporate Bonds
eNAM - National Agriculture Market
CCIL - Clearing Corporation of India Limited
ENSO - El Niño - Southern Oscillation
CD - Certificate of Deposit
ES - Event Study
CDS - Credit Default Swap
ETFs - Exchange -Traded Funds
CGA - Controller General of Accounts,
EU - European Union
Ministry of Finance
EXIM - Export-Import Bank of India
CI - Confidence Interval
FAE - First Advance Estimates
CiC - Currency in Circulation
iiiiii
Monetary Policy Report April 2021
FAO - Food and Agriculture Organization H2 - Second Half of the Financial Year
(October-March)
FBIL - Financial Benchmarks India Pvt Ltd
HKMA - Hong Kong Monetary Authority
FCI - Financial Condition Index
HRA - House Rent Allowance
FD - Fiscal Deficit
HTM - Held to Maturity
FDI - Foreign Direct Investment
IIP - Index of Industrial Production
Fed - Federal Reserve
IMF - International Monetary Fund
FICCI - Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry INR - Indian Rupee
FIMMDA - Fixed Income Money Market and IOCL - Indian Oil Corporation Limited
Derivatives Association of India
IOS - Industrial Outlook Survey
FIs - Financial Institutions
IPCC - Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
FIT - Flexible Inflation Targeting Change
FOMC - Federal Open Market Committee IRFCL - International Reserves and Foreign
Currency Liquidity
FPAS - Forecast and Policy Analysis System
ISM - Institute for Supply Management
FPI - Foreign Portfolio Investment
FRE - First Revised Estimates LAF - Liquidity Adjustment Facility
F-TRAC - Financial Market Trade Reporting LM - Lagrange Multiplier
and Confirmation System
LPG - Liquified Petroleum Gas
GDP - Gross Domestic Product
LTROs - Long Term Repo Operations
GEPUI - Global Economic Policy Uncertainty
MCLR - Marginal Cost of Funds Based
Index
Lending Rate
GFCE - Government Final Consumption
MEP - Minimum Export Price
Expenditure
MFs - Mutual Funds
GFCF - Gross Fixed Capital Formation
MGNREGA - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
GFD - Gross Fiscal Deficit
Employment Guarantee Act
GNDI - Gross National Disposable Income
MMRP - Modified Mixed Reference Period
GoI - Government of India
MOAFW - Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’
GSDP - Gross State Domestic Product Welfare
G-Sec - Government Securities m-o-m - Month-on-Month
GST - Goods and Services Tax MOSPI - Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation
GVA - Gross Value Added
MPC - Monetary Policy Committee
H1 - First Half of the Financial Year
(April-September) MPR - Monetary Policy Report
iivv
Abbreviations
MSCI - Morgan Stanley Capital International OMCs - Oil Marketing Companies
MSF - Marginal Standing Facility OMOs - Open Market Operations
MSMEs - Micro, Small and Medium OPEC - Organization of the Petroleum
Enterprises Exporting Countries
MSP - Minimum Support Price OT - Operation Twist
NABARD - National Bank for Agriculture and OTC - Over-the-Counter
Rural Development
PADO - Public Administration, Defence and
NBER - National Bureau of Economic Other services
Research
PBoC - People’s Bank of China
NBFCs - Non-Banking Financial Companies
PCE - Personal Consumption Expenditure
NCAER - National Council of Applied
PDS - Public Distribution System
Economic Research
PDs - Primary Dealers
NDS - Negotiated Dealing System
PEPP - Pandemic Emergency Purchase
NDTL - Net Demand and Time Liabilities Programme
NEER - Nominal Effective Exchange Rate PFCE - Private Final Consumption
Expenditure
NGFS - Network of Central Banks and
Supervisors for Greening the PLI - Production Linked Incentive
Financial System
PMI - Purchasing Managers’ Index
NGNF - Non-Government Non-Financial
POL - Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants
NHB - National Housing Bank
PSBs - Public Sector Banks
NIMs - Net Interest Margins
PSL - Priority Sector Lending
NOAA - National Oceanic and Atmospheric
PSU - Public Sector Undertaking
Administration
Q1 - First Quarter
NPA - Non-Performing Asset
Q2 - Second Quarter
NSC - National Savings Certificate
Q3 - Third Quarter
NSDL - National Securities Depository
Q4 - Fourth Quarter
Limited
q-o-q - Quarter-on-Quarter
NSO - National Statistical Office
QPM - Quarterly Projection Model
NSSF - National Small Saving Fund
RBA - Reserve Bank of Australia
NSSO - National Sample Survey Office
RBI - Reserve Bank of India
OECD - Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development RBNZ - Reserve Bank of New Zealand
OIS - Overnight Index Swaps RD - Revenue Deficit
vv
Monetary Policy Report April 2021
RE - Revised Estimates US$ - US Dollar
REER - Real Effective Exchange Rate VAR - Vector Autoregression
RHS - Right Hand Side
VAT - Value Added Tax
RL - Rural Labourers
VECM - Vector Error Correction Model
RM - Reserve Money
VRRR - Variable Rate Reverse Repo
SAAR - Seasonally Adjusted Annualised Rate
WAC - Weighted Average Coupon
SAE - Second Advance Estimates
WACR - Weighted Average Call Money Rate
SARB - South African Reserve Bank
WADR - Weighted Average Discount Rate
SCBs - Scheduled Commercial Banks
SDLs - State Development Loans WADTDR - Weighted Average Domestic Term
Deposit Rate
SEBI - Securities and Exchange Board of
India WALR - Weighted Average Lending Rate
SIAM - Society of Indian Automobile
WAR - Weighted Average Rate
Manufacturers
WCFI&ES - Working - Class Family Income &
SIDBI - Small Industries Development Bank
Expenditure Survey
of India
WEO - World Economic Outlook
SLF - Special Liquidity Facility
WMA - Ways and Means Advances
SLR - Statutory Liquidity Ratio
SOI - Southern Oscillation Index WPI - Wholesale Price Index
T-Bill - Treasury Bill WTI - West Texas Intermediate
TLTRO - Targeted Long-Term Repo Operation WTO - World Trade Organization
UK - United Kingdom
y-o-y - Year-on-Year
US - United States
YTD - Year to Date
vvii
I. Macroeconomic Outlook
The rebound from the COVID-19 induced slump has been sharper than anticipated and economic activity is
expected to rebound strongly in 2021-22. Headline consumer price index (CPI) inflation receded into the tolerance
band beginning December 2020. Core inflation pressures remain elevated, reflecting pass-through from higher
crude oil and non-oil commodity prices, high fuel and other taxes post-COVID and increased operating costs. The
evolving COVID-19 trajectory and progress on vaccination remain the key drivers of economic activity and inflation,
globally and in India.
Section 45-ZA of the RBI Act, 1934 requires that the momentum in Q4:2020, driven by multiple vaccine
Central Government shall, in consultation with the approvals, the launch of inoculation drives in many
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), determine the inflation countries and the extension of monetary and fiscal
target in terms of consumer price index (CPI), once stimuli. On the other hand, new mutants of the
in every five years. Accordingly, in a notification on COVID-19 virus, second/third waves of infections,
March 31, 2021, the Central Government, in renewed lockdowns in many countries and uneven
consultation with the RBI, retained the inflation target access to vaccines across countries continue to weigh
at 4 per cent (with the upper tolerance level of 6 per on the outlook. The resurgence of commodity price
inflation, supported by abundant global liquidity, has
cent and the lower tolerance level of 2 per cent) for
fuelled reflation trade in global financial markets.
the 5-year period April 1, 2021 to March 31, 2026.
Despite the promise of continued accommodative
The experience with successfully maintaining price
monetary policies by central banks, bond yields have
stability and the gains in credibility for monetary
firmed up from very low levels, spurred by inflation
policy since the institution of the inflation targeting
concerns and expectations of stronger growth. Amidst
framework in 2016 would be reinforced by the
stretched valuations, equity prices have become
retention of the target and the tolerance band.1 The
sensitive to the hardening of yields. In turn, exchange
experience during the COVID-19 period has testified
rates have become volatile, with capital outflows from
to the flexibility of the framework to respond to sharp
emerging economies in early March interrupting their
growth-inflation trade-offs and extreme supply-side
earlier ebullience on risk-on sentiments.
shocks.
Crude oil prices jumped sharply on production cuts by
I.1 Key Developments since the October 2020 MPR
the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
Since the release of the Monetary Policy Report (MPR) (OPEC) plus and on anticipation of stronger demand.
in October 2020, domestic economic activity has Non-oil commodity prices have risen substantially
turned out to be better than anticipated on the back across the board, putting upward pressures on
of a turnaround in gross fixed capital formation and a inflation in commodity importing countries. Gold
much shallower contraction in private consumption prices eased from the highs reached in August 2020
than in the preceding quarters of the financial year. on a stronger US dollar and expectations of economic
The global economy is pulling out of the loss of recovery. While inflation is expected to remain
1 Report on Currency and Finance 2020-21: Reviewing the Monetary Policy Framework, Reserve Bank of India, February 2021.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
subdued in advanced economies (AEs) and most of during the current financial year and into the next
the emerging market economies (EMEs) on account financial year – to revive growth on a durable basis
of negative output gaps, the large fiscal and monetary and mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the economy,
stimuli and elevated commodity prices have raised while ensuring that inflation remained within the
inflation concerns over longer horizons in advanced target going forward.
economies and in the nearer-term in the case of EMEs.
In the run up to the December 2020 meeting, CPI
Turning to the domestic economy, the gross domestic inflation had increased to 7.6 per cent in October 2020
product (GDP) shrugged off the contractions of with food inflation surging to double digits across
preceding quarters and moved into expansion zone protein-rich items, edible oils, vegetables and spices on
in Q3:2020-21 (+ 0.4 per cent, year-on-year). High multiple supply shocks. Core inflation had remained
frequency indicators point to the growth momentum sticky and was seen to firm up as economic activity
gaining strength in Q4 although the surge in normalised and demand picked up. At the same time,
COVID-19 infections in a few states in March 2021 with the signs of economic recovery being far from
imparts uncertainty to the assessment. The outlook broad-based and still dependent on sustained policy
for the agriculture sector remains bright, with higher support, the MPC decided to maintain status quo on
rabi sowing, above normal north-east monsoon and the policy rate and continue with the accommodative
adequate reservoir levels. Inflation receded into stance set out in the October resolution.
the tolerance band beginning December 2020 after
By the time the MPC met in February 2021, CPI
breaching the upper threshold of 6 per cent for six
inflation had declined to 4.6 per cent in December 2020
consecutive months (June-November 2020). The late
on the back of a larger than anticipated deflation in
winter easing of vegetable prices that caused this
vegetable prices. The MPC noted the sharp correction
softening has dissipated, however. In its February 2021
in food prices but was concerned that some pressures
print, headline inflation firmed up again, with upside
persisted, and core inflation remained elevated. As
pressures getting generalised across constituents of
the recovery was still to gather firm traction and
core inflation.
continued policy support remained crucial, the MPC
Monetary Policy Committee: October 2020-March
unanimously decided to keep the policy repo rate

unchanged and maintain its accommodative stance.
During October 2020-March 2021, the Monetary
The MPC’s voting pattern reflects the individual
Policy Committee (MPC) met thrice. In the October
members’ assessments, expectations and policy
2020 meeting, the MPC noted that the revival of
preferences (Table I.1). The MPC’s unanimous vote
the economy from the unprecedented COVID-19
on the policy rate in all the three meetings during
pandemic assumed the highest priority in the conduct
October 2020-March 2021 was a reflection of the
of monetary policy. High inflation was seen as easing
unprecedented pandemic and an unambiguous
with the unlocking of the economy, restoration of
consensus on continued policy support.
supply chains and normalisation of activity. Hence,
Macroeconomic Outlook
the MPC decided to look through the inflation spike
and unanimously voted to keep the policy repo Chapters II and III analyse macroeconomic
rate unchanged. It also voted to continue with the developments during October 2020-March 2021.
accommodative stance as long as necessary – at least Turning to the outlook, the evolution of key

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Table I.1 Monetary Policy Committees and Table I.2: Baseline Assumptions for Projections
Voting Patterns
Indicator MPR October 2020 MPR April 2021
Country Policy Meetings: October 2020 - March 2021
Crude oil US$ 40.9 per barrel US$ 64.6 per barrel
Total Meetings with Meetings without (Indian basket) during H2:2020-21 during 2021-22
Meetings Full Consensus Full Consensus
Exchange rate ` 73.6/US$ ` 72.6/US$
Brazil 4 4 0 during H2:2020-21 during 2021-22
Chile 4 4 0
Monsoon 9 per cent above long Normal for 2021
Colombia 5 3 2 period average for
Czech Republic 4 4 0 2020
Hungary 5 5 0
Global growth (-) 4.9 per cent in 2020 5.5 per cent in 2021
India 3 3 0 5.4 per cent in 2021 4.2 per cent in 2022
Israel 4 0 4
Fiscal deficit Given the Covid-19 To remain within BE
Japan 4 0 4
(per cent of GDP) impact on activity, 2021-22
South Africa 3 1 2 revenues, and Centre: 6.8
Sweden 2 2 0 expenditures and Combined: 10.8
Thailand 4 4 0 factoring in the
additional borrowings
UK 4 4 0
announced, fiscal
US 4 4 0 deficits are expected
to be significantly
Sources: Central bank websites. higher
Domestic No major change No major change
macroeconomic and financial variables over the macroeconomic/
structural
past six months warrants revisions in the baseline
policies during the
forecast
assumptions (Table I.2).
period
First, global crude oil prices have hardened notably Notes: 1. The Indian basket of crude oil represents a derived numeraire
comprising sour grade (Oman and Dubai average) and sweet
since November 2020 on the back of production cuts
grade (Brent) crude oil.
2. The exchange rate path assumed here is for the purpose of
by the OPEC and non-OPEC allies (OPEC plus) and
generating the baseline projections and does not indicate any
expected revival in demand with vaccine rollouts. ‘view’ on the level of the exchange rate. The Reserve Bank is
guided by the objective of containing excess volatility in the
Reflecting these developments as well as the attack foreign exchange market and not by any specific level of and/or
band around the exchange rate.
on Saudi Arabia’s oil facilities, Brent crude crossed
3. BE: Budget estimates.
4. Combined fiscal deficit refers to that of the Centre and States
US$ 70 per barrel in early March. Prices, however,
taken together.
corrected to around US$ 65 in the second half of Sources: RBI estimates; Budget documents; and IMF.
March over concerns of demand faltering on rising
aversion and capital outflows. Subsequently, the INR
COVID-19 infections and increase in crude stockpiles.
appreciated, riding on the domestic recovery gaining
Taking into account these developments, crude prices
traction, decline in the number of new infections,
(Indian basket) are assumed at US$ 64.6 per barrel for
vaccine rollout, and the measures announced in the
2021-22 in the baseline, 58 per cent above the October
Union Budget 2021-22 to revive the economy. The
MPR baseline for 2020-21 (Chart I.1).
INR depreciated sharply in late February on elevated
Second, the nominal exchange rate (the Indian rupee global financial market volatility following the spike
or INR vis-à-vis the US dollar) has moved in a range in sovereign bond yields in the US and other major
of INR 72-75 per US dollar since October 2020. The AEs. Taking these developments into account, the
INR remained under depreciating pressure till mid- exchange rate is assumed at INR 72.6 per US dollar for
November 2020 due to COVID-related uncertainty, risk 2021-22 in the baseline.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart I.1: Brent Prices Chart I.2: Global GDP Growth
Source: Bloomberg. Source: IMF.
Third, global economic activity has improved relative cereal prices. It rebounded to 5.0 per cent in February,
to the outlook in October 2020 with vaccine rollouts however, driven primarily by base effects. Core
and easing of lockdown restrictions, although it inflation pressures remained elevated, with inflation
remains uneven across countries and sectors. The excluding food and fuel at 6.0 per cent in February
International Monetary Fund (IMF) in its January 2021 reflecting pass-through to retail prices from higher
World Economic Outlook (WEO) update projected the crude oil and non-oil commodity prices, high fuel and
global economy to expand by 5.5 per cent in 2021 other taxes post-COVID and increased operating costs
(Chart I.2); the outlook remains heavily contingent (Chapter II).
upon the progress with COVID-19 containment
Looking ahead, three months and one year ahead
measures and the scale and speed of the vaccination
median inflation expectations of urban households
programme. The World Trade Organization’s (WTO)
rose by 80 basis points (bps) and 10 bps, respectively
trade barometers suggest a moderation in global
in the March 2021 round of the Reserve Bank’s
merchandise and services trade volumes from the
survey2 in tandem with higher food and oil prices. The
marked improvement in Q4:2020.
proportion of respondents expecting the general price
I.2 The Outlook for Inflation level to increase by more than the current rate also
increased for both three months and one year ahead
After breaching the upper tolerance threshold of 6.0
horizons vis-à-vis the previous round (Chart I.3).
per cent for six consecutive months (June-November
2020), CPI inflation fell in December 2020 and eased Manufacturing firms polled in the January-March
further in January 2021 to 4.1 per cent on the back of 2021 round of the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook
a sharp correction in vegetable prices and softening of survey3 expected further input cost pressures from
2 The Reserve Bank’s inflation expectations survey of households is conducted in 18 cities and the results of the March 2021 survey are based on
responses from 5,955 households.
3 The results of the January-March 2021 round of the industrial outlook survey are based on responses from 967 companies.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
managers’ index (PMI) survey for the manufacturing
Chart I.3: Inflation Expectations of Households
sector also reported strong increase in input prices in
March 2021 along with higher output prices; for the
services sector, input cost inflation was at an eight-
year high while selling prices remained stable in
February, reflecting efforts to boost sales.
Professional forecasters surveyed4 by the Reserve
Bank in March 2021 expected CPI inflation to ease
from 4.9-5.0 per cent in H1:2021-22 to 4.3 per cent in
Q3 and revert to 5.0 per cent in Q4 (Chart I.5).
Taking into account the initial conditions, signals
from forward-looking surveys and estimates from
structural and other time-series models, CPI inflation
is projected to average 5.0 per cent in Q4:2020-21, 5.2
Source: Inflation Expectations Survey of Households, RBI. per cent in Q1:2021-22 and Q2, 4.4 per cent in Q3,
and 5.1 per cent in Q4, with risks broadly balanced
raw materials in Q1:2021-22; moreover, positive (Chart I.6). The 50 per cent and the 70 per cent
sentiments on profit margins rose on the back of confidence intervals for headline inflation in
higher selling prices, suggesting a return of pricing Q4:2021-22 are 3.3-6.9 per cent and 2.4-7.8 per cent,
power (Chart I.4). The IHS Markit’s purchasing respectively.
Chart I.4: Expectations about Cost of Raw Chart I.5: Inflation Expectations of
Materials and Selling Prices Professional Forecasters
Note: Net response is the difference between the respondents reporting
optimism and those reporting pessimism. The range is -100 to 100. A positive/
negative value of net response is considered as optimistic/pessimistic from
the viewpoint of respondent firms. Therefore, higher positive values of selling
prices indicate increase in output prices while lower values for the cost of raw
materials indicate higher input price pressures and vice versa.
Source: Industrial Outlook Survey, RBI. Sources: Survey of Professional Forecasters, RBI and National Statistical Office.
4 31 panellists participated in the March 2021 round of the Reserve Bank’s survey of professional forecasters.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
keep inflation elevated. The downside risks are mostly
Chart I.6: Projection of CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
associated with a weaker than anticipated global and
domestic demand in the case of another wave of
infections and new mutants of the virus, fall in crude
oil prices on weak demand and an early normalisation
of supply chains. Prospects of a good rabi crop on top
of a bumper kharif harvest in 2020-21 and effective
supply management could keep food prices softer
than in the baseline.
I.3 The Outlook for Growth
Note: The fan chart depicts uncertainty around the baseline projection path. The rebound from the COVID-19 induced slump has
The baseline projections are conditioned upon the assumptions set out in
Table I.2. The thick red shaded area represents 50 per cent confidence interval, been sharper than anticipated. Real GDP growth turned
implying that there is 50 per cent probability that the actual outcome will be
within the range given by the thick red shaded area. Likewise, for 70 per cent and positive in Q3:2020-21 and a further strengthening
90 per cent confidence intervals, there is 70 per cent and 90 per cent probability,
respectively, that the actual outcomes will be in the range represented by the
is expected to have occurred in Q4:2020-21. Going
respective shaded areas.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
forward, rural demand is likely to remain resilient
on good prospects for the agriculture sector. Urban
For 2022-23, assuming a normalisation of supply
demand and demand for contact-intensive services
chains on the back of vaccine rollout, a normal
is also expected to strengthen with the spread of
monsoon and no major exogenous or policy shocks,
vaccination. The fiscal stimulus under AtmaNirbhar
structural model (Box I.1) estimates indicate that
2.0 and 3.0 schemes and increased capital outlays
inflation will move in a range of 4.5-4.8 per cent. The
and the investment-enhancing proposals in the
50 per cent and the 70 per cent confidence intervals
Union Budget 2021-22 will likely accelerate public
for Q4:2022-23 are 2.9-6.5 per cent and 1.9-7.5 per
investment and crowd-in private investment. While
cent, respectively. There are a number of upside and
the domestic financial conditions are expected to
downside risks to the baseline inflation forecasts. The
remain supportive in view of the guidance from RBI
major upside risks include supply chain disruptions
that systemic liquidity would continue to remain
persisting for a longer period, rise in global crude oil
comfortable over the ensuing year, the risks of
and other commodity prices beyond what is currently
spillovers from volatility in global financial markets
in the baseline, and stronger pass-through of input
remain elevated.
costs amidst improvement in demand conditions and
return of pricing power. Persistent structural demand- Turning to the forward-looking surveys, consumer
supply imbalances in key food items such as pulses, confidence5 for the year ahead dipped, although it was
edible oils and fats, and eggs, meat and fish could also still in the optimistic zone, in the March 2021 round,
5 The survey is conducted by the Reserve Bank in 13 major cities and the March 2021 round is based on responses from 5,372 respondents.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Box I.1: Quarterly Projection Model 2.0
The Quarterly Projection Model (QPM) in the RBI’s Forecast (e.g., balance-sheet effects, dynamic Dutch disease) due
and Policy Analysis System (FPAS) is the workhorse model to sudden surges or reversals in capital flows (Ghosh et
for generating medium term projections and undertaking al., 2016).
policy scenario analysis, consistent with the central
The model properties of these features can be best
bank’s mandate under the flexible inflation targeting (FIT)
represented through impulse response functions which
framework (Benes et al., 2016). The QPM is a forward-
trace out the impact on key macroeconomic variables
looking, open economy, calibrated, new-Keynesian gap
in response to shocks. First, an expansionary structural
model, and incorporates specific characteristics of the
fiscal shock contributes to demand pressures and creates
Indian economy.
a positive output gap. Increasing debt could contribute
With a view to enriching the model’s analytics and to to depreciation of the currency through elevated country
capture monetary-fiscal-external-real sector interactions risk premia. The positive output gap and currency
more comprehensively, the model structure has been depreciation together lead to higher inflation, warranting
expanded and the parameters of the QPM recalibrated, monetary policy action (Chart I.1.1a). On the other hand,
taking into account pre-COVID period data (up to Q4:2019) if the fiscal deficit shock is cyclical, it has a modest impact
and latest empirical findings. In terms of its structure, on inflation. Second, an increase in fuel taxes feeds into
the augmented QPM model (QPM 2.0) incorporates: a) higher fuel prices and ex-food fuel inflation through
fiscal-monetary dynamics, b) disaggregated fuel pricing the cost-push channel. Headline inflation goes up by 25
(oil price, exchange rate and fuel taxes) and c) balance of bps in response to a fuel tax increase of `10 per litre
payments and exchange rate interactions. The fiscal block (Chart I.1.1b). Inflation expectations edge higher and
in QPM 2.0 decomposes the primary deficit into structural remain entrenched, if tax reversals do not happen.
(cyclically adjusted) and cyclical components, with shocks Demand conditions also remain subdued for a longer
to the structural component impacting inflation through period. Finally, the impact of capital flows depends, inter
aggregate demand and country risk premia. The monetary alia, on the RBI’s decision to intervene and sterilise. In
policy stance affects the fiscal position through the case of a capital outflow shock of one percentage point
interest rate channel (Escolano, 2010). The fuel block (of nominal GDP) and assuming the RBI intervenes
incorporates India’s complex system of pricing – items like and sterilises 70 per cent of these capital outflows,
petrol and diesel are priced on the basis of international the reserves will deplete by 0.7 percentage points
oil prices, exchange rate and fuel taxes (excise duty and of nominal GDP. The exchange rate will depreciate,
value added tax (VAT)); liquified petroleum gas (LPG) and inducing inflationary pressure (Chart I.1.1c). In the case
kerosene prices are market determined but with lagged of no intervention, the exchange rate depreciation will
pass-through; and prices of electricity are administered be relatively higher.
by state governments. The cost-push implications are
A historical decomposition of the shocks suggests that the
also incorporated in the enhanced aggregate supply block.
FIT framework helped in anchoring inflation expectations
Finally, the balance of payments module incorporates
during 2016-20 leading to lower headline as well as core
determinants of current and capital accounts and their
inflation. The disinflation during the post-FIT period was
interaction with the exchange rate management, guided
also supported by favourable supply shocks, both food
by the objective of containing excess volatility in the
and fuel, benign external factors and prudent fiscal policy
foreign exchange market. This recognises the costs
(Chart I.1.2).
associated with spurts in volatility in the exchange rate
(contd.)

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart I.1.1: Impulse Responses
a: Response to Structural Deficit Shock b: Response to Fuel Tax Shock# c: Response to Capital Outflow Shock
Structural Fiscal Deficit* Fiscal Deficit* Fuel Tax Petrol & Diesel Inflation Capital Outflow* Reserves*
Public Debt* Output Gap Headline Inflation Core Inflation** Exchange Rate Headline Inflation
Headline Inflation Policy Rate Output Gap Policy Rate Policy Rate Output Gap
#: An increase of ` 10 per litre. *: Per cent of nominal GDP. **: CPI excluding food, fuel, petrol and diesel.
Note: x-axes represent quarters and y-axes are in percentage points.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
Chart I.1.2: Historical Decomposition of Headline Inflation
Source: RBI staff estimates.
References: Ghosh, A. R., J. D. Ostry, and M. Chamon (2016), “Two
Targets, Two Instruments: Monetary and Exchange Rate
Benes, J., K. Clinton, A. George, P. Gupta, J. John, O.
Policies in Emerging Market Economies”, Journal of
Kamenik, D. Laxton, P. Mitra, G. Nadhanael, R. Portillo, H.
International Money and Finance, 60, 172-196.
Wang, and F. Zhang (2016), “Quarterly Projection Model
Escolano, M. J. (2010), “A Practical Guide to Public Debt
for India: Key Elements and Properties”, RBI Working
Dynamics, Fiscal Sustainability, and Cyclical Adjustment
Paper Series No. 8.
of Budgetary Aggregates”, International Monetary Fund.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Chart I.7: Consumer Confidence Chart I.8: Business Assessment and Expectations
Source: Consumer Confidence Survey, RBI. Source: Industrial Outlook Survey, RBI.
driven by lower expectations on the general economic base effects before tapering in subsequent quarters
situation, the employment scenario and income (Chart I.9 and Table I.4).
conditions (Chart I.7).
Sentiments in the manufacturing sector for the quarter Table I.3: Business Expectations Surveys
ahead strengthened further in the January-March
Item NCAER FICCI Dun and CII
2021 round of the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook Business Overall Bradstreet Business
Confidence Business Composite Confidence
survey, reflecting optimism on production, order
Index Confidence Business Index
books, capacity utilisation, employment conditions (February Index Optimism (March
2021) (February Index 2021)
and the overall business situation (Chart I.8). 2021) (January-
March
Surveys by other agencies also indicate optimism on 2021)
future business expectations (Table I.3). According to Current level of 84.8 74.2 79.9 68.7
the index
the purchasing managers’ survey for March 2021, the
Index as per 65.5 70.9 46.2 62.9
one year ahead business expectations of firms in the previous survey
manufacturing sector exhibit confidence; optimism of % change (q-o-q) 29.6 4.7 72.9 9.2
sequential
firms in the services sector strengthened to a one-year
% change (y-o-y) -23.7 25.8 26.8 28.7
high in February.
Notes:
1. NCAER: National Council of Applied Economic Research.
Professional forecasters polled in the March 2021
2. FICCI: Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry.
round of the Reserve Bank’s survey expected a sharp 3. CII: Confederation of Indian Industry.
Sources: NCAER, FICCI, CII and Dun & Bradstreet Information Services
uptick in real GDP growth in Q1:2021-22, driven by India Pvt. Ltd.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart I.9: Professional Forecasters’ Projection of Table I.4: Projections - Reserve Bank and
Real GDP Growth Professional Forecasters
(Per cent)
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Reserve Bank’s Baseline Projections
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 5.0 5.1 4.7
Real GDP growth -8.0 10.5 6.8
Median Projections of Professional Forecasters
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 4.9 5.0
Real GDP growth -7.5 11.0
Gross domestic saving (per cent of GNDI) 28.9 29.6
Gross capital formation (per cent of GDP) 27.7 30.1
Credit growth of scheduled commercial banks 6.4 8.0
Combined gross fiscal deficit (per cent of GDP) 14.0 10.5
Central government gross fiscal deficit 9.5 6.8
(per cent of GDP)
Repo rate (end-period) 4.00 4.00
Yield on 91-days treasury bills (end-period) 3.3 3.9
Sources: Survey of Professional Forecasters, RBI and National Statistical Office. Yield on 10-year central government 6.2 6.5
securities (end-period)
Overall balance of payments (US$ billion) 97.2 50.6
Overall, economic activity is gathering strength, Merchandise exports growth -10.3 15.0
supported by the recovery in both demand and Merchandise imports growth -19.0 24.1
Current account balance (per cent of GDP) 1.0 -0.8
supply channels, sustained rollout of the vaccination
Note: GNDI: Gross National Disposable Income.
programme, growth-enhancing proposals in the
Sources: RBI staff estimates; and Survey of Professional Forecasters
Union Budget and highly accommodative monetary (March 2021).
conditions. Taking into account the baseline
assumptions, the survey indicators, and model There are upside as well as downside risks to the
forecasts, real GDP growth6 is projected to pick up baseline growth path. A faster decline in COVID-19
from (-) 8.0 per cent in 2020-21 to 10.5 per cent in infections helped by a rapid vaccination drive, large
2021-22 – with a quarterly path of 26.2 per cent in pent-up demand for contact-intensive services, and
Q1, 8.3 per cent in Q2, 5.4 per cent in Q3, and 6.2 per stronger global demand provide an upside to the
cent in Q4 – with risks evenly balanced (Chart I.10 and baseline growth path. The uncertainty associated with
Table I.4). For 2022-23, assuming a normal monsoon, the spread of COVID-19, including new mutants of
and no major exogenous or policy shocks, the the virus, deviation of the south-west monsoon from
structural model estimates indicate real GDP growth the baseline assumption of a normal monsoon, and
at 6.8 per cent, with quarterly growth rates in the elevated crude oil prices and global financial market
range of 6.2-7.3 per cent. volatility pose downside risks.
6 The Central government in February 2021 decided to bring the off-budget part of food subsidies on-budget, which has resulted in GDP contraction (-8.0
per cent) being notably higher than that (-6.5 per cent) in gross value added (GVA) in 2020-21. This budgetary treatment would especially depress reported
GDP growth for Q4:2020-21 (see Chapter III).

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
variants across the world and an unequal access to
Chart I.10: Projection of Growth in Real GDP (y-o-y)
vaccines across countries can result in a shallower and
delayed global recovery. A surge in global bond yields
– as experienced in February 2021 on reflation trade
– could induce large global financial market volatility,
disorderly adjustment in asset prices and disrupt
global demand. In such a scenario, if global recovery
is 100 bps below the baseline, domestic growth and
inflation could be lower by around 40 bps and 30
bps, respectively, from the baseline trajectories.
Conversely, success in containing the spread of new
mutants, widespread and equitable distribution
Note: The fan chart depicts uncertainty around the baseline projection
of vaccines across the world, and additional policy
path. The baseline projections are conditioned upon the assumptions set out
in Table I.2. The thick green shaded area represents 50 per cent confidence
stimulus could provide a boost to global economic
interval, implying that there is 50 per cent probability that the actual outcome
will be within the range given by the thick green shaded area. Likewise, for activity. In this scenario, assuming that global growth
70 per cent and 90 per cent confidence intervals, there is 70 per cent and 90
per cent probability, respectively, that the actual outcomes will be in the range surprises by 100 bps on the upside, domestic growth
represented by the respective shaded areas.
Source: RBI staff estimates. and inflation could edge higher by around 40 bps and
30 bps, respectively (Charts I.11a and I.12a).
I.4 Balance of Risks
(ii) International Crude Oil Prices
The baseline projections of inflation and growth are
International crude oil prices have risen sharply on
conditional on the assumptions of key domestic and
production cuts and hopes of demand revival. For
international macroeconomic and financial conditions
a net energy importer like India, the dynamics of
described in the previous sections. The inherent
international crude price movements have significant
uncertainties associated with such assumptions have
macroeconomic implications. A quicker containment
exacerbated due to the COVID-19 pandemic and could
of COVID-19 inducing higher global growth than the
have a significant bearing on the inflation and growth
baseline and a faster closing of the global output gap
trajectories. This section explores plausible alternative
along with sustained production cuts by the OPEC
scenarios to assess the balance of risks around the
plus could lead to a sharper increase in international
baseline projections.
crude oil prices. Assuming crude oil price to be 10 per
(i) Global Growth Uncertainties
cent above the baseline, domestic inflation and growth
The COVID-19 pandemic induced the severest global could be higher by 30 bps and weaker by around 20
recession in decades in 2020. Global growth is expected bps, respectively, over the baseline. Conversely, crude
to recover to 5.5 per cent in 2021, reflecting base oil prices could soften if the recovery is more subdued
effects, the expected moderation in new infections, owing to a faster spread of virus mutations, the delays
the rollout of the vaccination programme and large in vaccination or improved supplies of shale gas. As
monetary and fiscal support. However, the uncertainty a result, if the price of the crude falls by 10 per cent
about the pandemic’s spread and its containment relative to the baseline, inflation could ease by around
continues to pose high risks to the global outlook on 30 bps with a boost of 20 bps to growth (Charts I.11a
both sides. A faster spread of mutated coronavirus and I.12a).

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart I.11: Impact of Risk Scenarios on the Baseline Inflation Path
a: Crude Oil Prices and Global Demand Shocks b: Exchange Rate and Food Price Shocks
Source: RBI staff estimates.
(iii) Exchange Rate
– could lead to a broader risk aversion to EME assets
The INR has exhibited two-way movements over the and net capital outflows. In such a scenario, should
past six months, reflecting both global and domestic the INR depreciate by 5 per cent from the baseline,
factors. Looking ahead, heightened volatility in global inflation could move up by around 20 bps while GDP
financial markets, especially a snapback in global growth could be higher by around 15 bps through
sovereign bond yields – as observed in February 2021 increased net exports (Charts I.11b and I.12b). On
Chart I.12: Impact of Risk Scenarios on the Baseline Growth Path
a: Crude Oil Prices and Global Demand Shocks b: Exchange Rate and Food Price Shocks
Source: RBI staff estimates.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
the other hand, given India’s relatively better growth determining the food as well as headline inflation
outlook and expectations of strong capital inflows, (Charts I.11b and I.12b).
there could be INR appreciation. If the INR appreciates
I.5 Conclusion
by 5 per cent relative to the baseline, inflation and
Domestic economic activity is widely expected to
GDP growth could moderate by around 20 bps and 15
rebound strongly in 2021-22. Rapid vaccination
bps, respectively, vis-à-vis the baseline.
drive, large pent-up demand, investment enhancing
measures by the government and better external
(iv) Food Inflation
demand provide an upside to the baseline growth
Food inflation has softened since December 2020, path while surge in infections, new mutants,
largely led by the sharp fall in prices of vegetables deviation of the south-west monsoon from the
and moderation in prices of cereals. Going forward, baseline assumption of a normal monsoon, higher
the bumper kharif harvest, record rabi sowing, crude oil and non-oil commodity prices and global
further easing of supply chains and effective supply financial market volatility impart downside risks to
management measures could moderate food inflation the baseline growth path. Lingering supply chain
disruptions, rising global crude oil prices and stronger
by 100 bps below the baseline. Conversely, the
pass-through of input costs could push headline
recent hardening of global food prices and domestic
inflation above the baseline. There is also the
demand-supply gaps in key food items like pulses,
probability of softer international crude oil prices on
edible oils and fats, and eggs, fish and meat could
the back of a weaker than anticipated global demand,
lead to persistent upward pressures of around 100
bountiful foodgrains production and effective supply
bps on food inflation. Higher inflation expectations
management coming together to ease inflation more
could then add to sustained pressures on headline
than anticipated. The evolving COVID-19 trajectory
inflation. The baseline assumes a normal south-west
and progress on vaccination remain the key drivers
monsoon in 2021 and any deviations in the actual
of economic activity and inflation, globally and in
outturn on either side would be a critical factor in
India.

II. Prices and Costs
In 2020-21, inflation breached the upper tolerance band of 6 per cent for six consecutive months in the post-lockdown
period (June-November 2020) due to a series of cost-push shocks – supply chain disruptions; weather shocks; higher
crude oil and other commodity prices; and higher taxes. The sharp correction during December-January was reversed
on adverse base effects in February. Core inflation remained sticky at elevated levels. Costs of farm and industrial
inputs recovered with the gradual unlocking of the economy and rural wage growth moderated although it remained
higher than in the pre-lockdown period.
In the months following the publication of the October of 6.0 per cent in February 2021 under the combined
2020 MPR, inflationary pressures got accentuated effects of rising industrial raw material prices, record
and headline inflation1 remained above the upper high petroleum product prices and the higher cost
tolerance threshold. Core inflation also stayed sticky at
of doing business in the post-lockdown period
elevated levels. During December 2020-January 2021,
(Chart II.1).
however, there was a sharp correction and inflation
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act enjoins the RBI
eased significantly, moving closer to the target, only to
reverse to 5.0 per cent in February 2021, primarily due to set out deviations of actual inflation outcomes
to adverse base effects. Core inflation (CPI inflation from projections, if any, and explain the underlying
excluding food and fuel) surged to a 28-month high reasons thereof. The October 2020 MPR had projected
Chart II.1: CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
Note: The imputed CPI prints for April and May 2020 have been regarded as a break in the CPI series.
Sources: National Statistical Office (NSO); and RBI staff estimates.
1 Headline inflation is measured by year-on-year changes in all-India consumer price index – combined (CPI-C).

Chapter II Prices and Costs
moderation in CPI inflation from 6.8 per cent in monetary policies in the major advanced economies.
Q2:2020-21 to 5.4 per cent in Q3 and 4.5 per cent in Cost-push pressures also impinged on core inflation
Q4. In Q3, actual inflation was 100 basis points (bps) more than anticipated. In Q4 (January-February), the
above projection (Chart II.2). A sharp, unanticipated correction in food prices resulted in actual inflation
increase in food inflation – double-digit inflation in aligning with the projection (Chart II.2).
eggs, meat and fish (due to fragmented supply chains),
II.1 Consumer Prices
pulses (tight demand supply balance), edible oils (high
The sharp upward movement of inflation to a peak of
international prices), and vegetables (unseasonal
7.6 per cent in October 2020 came about from a pick-
rains) – led to this substantial overshoot. Retail price
up in price momentum in food as well as in the core
margins for food also increased, with the persistence
category.2 Thereafter, strong favourable base effects
of supply chain disruptions. International crude
brought about a moderation in headline inflation to
oil prices (Indian basket) jumped from the baseline
6.9 per cent in November 2020, more than offsetting
assumption of US$ 40.9 per barrel for H2:2020-21
positive momentum in all these components. In
to US$ 61.2 per barrel by February 2021. Gold prices
December 2020, a negative momentum in headline
remained elevated in Q3:2020-21 over COVID-19
inflation due to a sharp decline in food prices, along
concerns, supported by highly accommodative
with favourable base effects, resulted in headline
inflation declining by 2.3 percentage points. In
Chart II.2: CPI Inflation (y-o-y): January 2021, headline inflation moderated further
Projection versus Actual
due to a large negative momentum engendered by
food prices. In February 2021, an adverse base effect
of around 70 bps resulted in a substantial pick-up in
inflation (Chart II.3).
Reflecting broad-based price pressures, the
distribution of CPI group/sub-group inflation in
2020-21 was centred at 4.9 per cent, higher than
the sub-4 per cent levels seen in recent years
(Chart II.4). With several sub-groups exhibiting
double-digit inflation, the inflation distribution also
exhibited a fat tail, pushing mean headline inflation
*: Projection for entire Q4:2020-21 vis-a-vis actual average inflation during
in excess of 6.0 per cent. The diffusion indices of price
January-February 2021.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
changes in CPI items on a non-seasonally adjusted
2 A change in CPI year-on-year (y-o-y) inflation between any two months is the difference between the current month-on-month (m-o-m) change in the
price index (momentum) and the m-o-m change in the price index 12 months earlier (base effect). For more details, see Box I.1 of the MPR, September
2014.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart II.3: CPI Inflation – Momentum and Base Effects
a: CPI Headline b: CPI Food and Beverages
c: CPI Fuel and Light d: CPI excluding Food and Fuel
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
basis3 increased in January-February 2021, indicative be captured through vector autoregression (VAR)
of price pressures across the CPI basket (Chart II.5).4 estimates and historical decomposition.5 The high
inflation episode in Q3:2020-21 was predominantly
II.2 Drivers of Inflation
due to supply shocks. In Q4, supply side factors turned
The relative role of various demand and supply benign pulling down headline inflation. On the other
shocks impinging upon the inflation dynamics can hand, easy monetary conditions and the firming up
3 In view of the non-availability of CPI item level data for the period March-May 2020, the diffusion indices have been constructed with item level indices
without seasonal adjustment.
4 The CPI diffusion index, a measure of dispersion of price changes, categorises items in the CPI basket according to whether their prices have risen,
remained stagnant or fallen over the previous month. A reading above 50 for the diffusion index signals a broad expansion or generalisation of price
increases and a reading below 50 signals broad-based price decline.
5 Historical decomposition estimates the contribution of each shock to the movements in inflation over the sample period (Q4:2010-11 to Q4:2020-21)
based on a vector autoregression (VAR) with the following variables (represented as the vector Y) –crude oil prices; exchange rate (INR per US$), asset price
t
(BSE Sensex), CPI; the output gap; rural wages; the policy repo rate; and money supply (M3). All variables other than policy repo rate are growth rates.
The VAR can be written in reduced form as: Y =c + A Y + e; where e represents a vector of shocks. Using Wold decomposition, Y can be represented
t t-1 t t t
as a function of its deterministic trend and sum of all the shocks e. This formulation facilitates decomposition of the deviation of inflation from its
t
deterministic trend into the sum of contributions from various shocks.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.4: Average CPI Inflation (y-o-y) Chart II.5: Diffusion Indices: CPI
(Kernel Density Estimates) (M-o-M Non-Seasonally Adjusted)
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates. Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
of asset and crude oil prices contributed positively items, the contribution of semi-perishable goods (non-
to the deviation of inflation from trend levels in Q3 durable goods with a 30-day recall) remained elevated
and Q4. Muted demand conditions and moderation (Chart II.6b). Imported components contributed 0.5
in rural wage growth pulled down inflation in Q3 and percentage points to headline inflation in February
Q4, offsetting these effects (Chart II.6a). 2021, driven by gold, silver, edible oils and higher
High volatility in perishable goods (non-durable domestic taxes on petroleum products (Chart II.6c).
goods with a 7-day recall6) from supply shocks in
Food Group
both directions had a significant bearing on the
Food inflation rose sharply to 10.1 per cent in
inflation trajectory. With the surge in vegetable
October 2020 and remained above 6 per cent for 14
prices, the contribution of perishables to overall
consecutive months till November 2020. It moderated
inflation increased to 55.3 per cent during September-
quickly in the subsequent months to 2.7 per cent
November 2020 from 46.8 per cent in June-August
in January 2021 before picking up to 4.3 per cent in
2020. Subsequently, as vegetable prices corrected,
February 2021. These large variations were primarily
perishables’ contribution decreased sharply to
32.0 per cent during December 2020-January 2021. driven by movements in prices of vegetables
In February 2021, following the lower rate of deflation (Chart II.7). The softening of inflation in respect of
in the prices of vegetables, perishables’ share increased cereals and products, milk and sugar and confectionery
to 38.6 per cent. Reflecting the increase in prices also aided the easing in food inflation. On the other
of protein-based food, edible oils and other food hand, there were upward pressures from oils and fats,
6 The CPI weighting diagrams use the modified mixed reference period (MMRP) data based on the 2011-12 Consumer Expenditure Survey conducted by
the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO). Under MMRP, data are collected on expenditure incurred for frequently purchased items – edible oil, eggs,
fish, meat, vegetables, fruits, spices, beverages, processed foods, pan, tobacco and intoxicants – during the last seven days; for clothing, bedding, footwear,
education, medical (institutional), durable goods, during the last 365 days; and for all other food, fuel and light, miscellaneous goods and services
including non-institutional medical services, rents and taxes, data relate to the last 30 days.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart II.6: Drivers of CPI Inflation
a: Decomposition of CPI Inflation*
* Deviation from deterministic trend.
Note: Estimated using a vector autoregression (see footnote 5 for details).
Sources: NSO; RBI; Petroleum Planning & Analysis Cell (PPAC); BSE; Labour Bureau; and RBI staff estimates.
b: Contribution of Goods and Services c: Contribution of Imported Inflation
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
non-alcoholic beverages, prepared meals and snacks In the case of cereals (weight of 9.7 per cent in the CPI
and fruits. Despite a sizeable moderation, inflation in and 21.1 per cent in the food and beverages group),
five out of twelve food sub-groups was still in double a bumper kharif rice production and record buffer
digits in February 2021. Seven of the twelve sub- stocks – around 6.7 times the norms for rice and 2.1
groups recorded increases above the historical average times for wheat as on March 16, 2021 – led to easing
(Chart II.8). Rural and urban food inflation exhibited in inflation to (-)0.3 per cent in February 2021 from 7.9
broadly similar movements, with no significant per cent in June 2020. Higher rabi sowing has kept the
difference between month-over-month changes in price pressures subdued despite higher procurement
prices of food and its sub-groups in rural and urban and exports of both rice and wheat.
areas.7
7 Based on modified z-test (accounting for autocorrelation) on difference of rural and urban m-o-m changes of seasonally adjusted series.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.7: CPI Food Inflation
a: Drivers of CPI Food Inflation b: Drivers of CPI Protein-based Food Inflation
*: Includes meat & fish, egg, milk and pulses.
**: Includes fruits, sugar, non-alcoholic beverages and prepared meals. Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI - protein based food.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI food and beverages.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
Inflation in prices of vegetables (weight of 6.0 per cent potato prices (Chart II.9). Potato price inflation reached
in the CPI and 13.2 per cent in the food and beverages a peak of 107.0 per cent in November 2020. Higher
group) rose steeply to a peak of 22.1 per cent in imports and fresh arrivals of early rabi production
October 2020 and then corrected rapidly to move in the market led to a sharp easing in prices during
into deflation during December 2020-February 2021, December 2020-February 2021, with a deflation of (-)
driven primarily by a large fall in onion, tomato and 21.3 per cent in February 2021.
Chart II.8: CPI Food – Financial Year Price Build-up
(February over March)
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI - food and beverages.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
and Maharashtra on the back of excess rainfall pushed
Chart II.9: Drivers of Vegetable Inflation (y-o-y)
inflation to a peak of 54.5 per cent in September 2020.
Thereafter, with an increase in fresh arrivals, prices
eased beginning October 2020.
In protein-based food items, inflation in pulses
(weight of 2.4 per cent in the CPI and 5.2 per cent in
the food and beverages group) was in double digits
throughout 2020-21. To improve domestic supplies,
the government eased restrictions and issued licenses
for imports, reduced import duties on masur, released
2 lakh tonnes of tur (arhar) from the buffer stock and
extended the time limit for import of tur under the
import quota of 4 lakh tonnes for 2020-21. Reflecting
these measures, as well as the arrival of kharif pulses
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate items weights in CPI-vegetables.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
and favourable base effects, pulses inflation moderated
to 12.5 per cent in February 2021 from 18.3 per cent
Inflation in onion prices, which was in negative
in October 2020. The production of pulses at 244
territory during August-September 2020, witnessed
lakh tonnes in 2020-21 (second advance estimates for
substantial price pressures during September-
2020-21) is expected to augment the domestic
November 2020 as excess rainfall in major producing
availability and improve the stock-use ratio
regions of Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka and
(Chart II.12). Pulses inflation can thus be expected
Maharashtra damaged the kharif crop and impacted
to moderate in the coming months, given the past
late kharif production, resulting in lower market
relationship between production/stocks and prices8,
arrivals. To contain the escalation in prices, the
although pressures may persist in some items like tur
Government imposed an export ban on onions in
and urad.
September 2020 (removed in January 2021), increased
Among animal protein-rich items, inflation in egg,
imports, released buffer stocks and imposed stock
holding limits on wholesalers and retailers. These meat and fish also remained in double digits during
steps, along with fresh arrivals, led to onion prices most of 2020-21. It eased during November 2020
moving into deflation during November 2020-January - February 2021, largely due to the fall in prices of
2021. Onion prices picked up again in February chicken from improved supplies and a decline in
2021, however, due to drop in arrivals on account of demand due to bird flu during January 2021. Prices
unseasonal rainfall in January 2021 in Maharashtra. In of mutton and pork, however, remained high due to
the case of the third key vegetable, i.e., tomatoes, low supply bottlenecks and higher demand for protein-
arrivals from the key producing regions in Karnataka based food items.
8 The bumper harvests during 2016-17 and 2017-18 of 231 lakh tonnes and 254 lakh tonnes, respectively, and the consequent higher stock-use ratios
coincided with record 29 consecutive months of deflation during December 2016 to April 2019.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.10: Pulses Inflation and Stock-Use Ratio: Monthly Balance Sheet
Sources: NSO; Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCIS); Commission of Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP); Ministry of Agriculture; and
RBI staff estimates.
Prices of milk and products (weight of 6.6 per cent in the palm oil and soybean oil) resulted in oils and fats
CPI and 14.4 per cent in the food and beverages group) inflation peaking at around 20 per cent in December
remained muted in H2:2020-21, reflecting a quick 2020-February 2021. The government reduced the
restoration of supply chains of the well-established basic customs duty (BCD) on crude palm oil from 37.5
system of cooperatives amidst lower demand from per cent to 27.5 per cent effective November 27, 2020
the bulk segment. Prices of sugar and confectionery and then revised it to 32.5 per cent [including the
(weight of 1.4 per cent in the CPI and 3.0 per cent in Agricultural Infrastructure Development Cess (AIDC)]
the food and beverages group) eased during September effective February 2, 2021. Mustard oil and refined oil
2020 - February 2021 on the back of expectations of a were the highest contributors to elevated edible oil
inflation.
bumper crop and higher domestic production even as
international sugar prices increased due to concerns Retail Margins
over lower global availability in 2020-21.9
Average retail price margins over wholesale prices
Prices of oils and fats (weight of 3.6 per cent in the increased across all the major sub-groups (cereals,
CPI and 7.8 per cent in the food and beverages group) vegetables, edible oils and pulses) during the post-
remained one of the major pressure points throughout lockdown period, pulling up headline inflation. The
the year. Higher demand for mustard oil coupled margins were higher in edible oils, vegetables and
with elevated international prices10 (particularly pulses than in the other two sub-groups (Chart II.11).11
9 Domestic sugar mills produced 278 lakh tonnes of sugar during 2021 sugar season (till March 31, 2021) as compared with 233 lakh tonnes in the
corresponding period of the previous year.
10 International edible oil prices firmed up due to labour shortages in palm oil plantations in Indonesia and Malaysia, drought in Argentina affecting
soybean production, and increased Chinese demand.
11 The analysis is based on daily price data on wholesale and retail prices from the Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA) for four major sub-groups –
cereals, vegetables, edible oils and pulses – for January 2012 to December 2020 (excluding data for January-February 2021 due to changes in price collection
mechanism and item varieties by DCA). The overall period has been divided into three phases, viz., pre-lockdown (January 2012 to February 2020),
lockdown (March 2020 to May 2020) and post-lockdown (June 20 to December 2020). Item level retail and wholesale prices are aggregated at respective
sub-group using item level CPI weights.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart II.11: Retail Price Margins
a: Cereals b: Pulses
c: Vegetables d: Edible Oil
Sources: Department of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution; and RBI staff estimates.
CPI Fuel Group CPI excluding Food and Fuel
Inflation in fuel prices initially moderated from 3.2 CPI inflation excluding food and fuel, or core
per cent in August 2020 to 1.6 per cent in November inflation, remained sticky and hovered between 5.4
2020, due to a decline in LPG and PDS kerosene per cent and 6.0 per cent during September 2020
prices and favourable base effects. Fuel inflation then to February 2021. Excluding petrol, diesel, gold
increased to 3.5 per cent in February 2021, led by and silver also, core inflation remained elevated
prices of LPG, kerosene and dung cake (Chart II.12a). (between 4.5 per cent and 5.1 per cent) over this
The movements in LPG inflation largely reflected the period (Chart II.13). While the price build-up in the
lagged impact of international prices (Chart II.12b). core categories was similar to the historical average,
PDS-kerosene prices were in deflation throughout considerable variation was observed across subgroups:
2020-21, as international prices to which they are transport and communication, pan, tobacco and
linked have been below pre-COVID levels since intoxicants, personal care and effects, health and
April 2020 (Chart II.12c). recreation and amusement exhibited substantially

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.12: CPI Fuel Group Inflation
a: Drivers (y-o-y)
*: Includes diesel [excl. conveyance], coke, coal, charcoal and other fuels.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI- fuel and light.
b: LPG: Domestic and International Prices c: Kerosene: Domestic and International Prices
Notes: (1) The international price for LPG is based on spot prices for Saudi Butane and Propane, combined in the ratio of 60:40 respectively. These international product
prices are indicative import prices. Further details are available at www.ppac.org.in.
(2) The indicative international price for kerosene is the Singapore Jet Kero spot price.
(3) The domestic prices of LPG and kerosene represent the average prices of four and three metros, respectively, as reported by Indian Oil Corporation Limited
(IOCL).
Sources: NSO; Bloomberg; IOCL; and RBI staff estimates.
higher build-up than the long-term average whereas prices, along with the non-reversal of the substantial
clothing and footwear, housing, household goods and post-lockdown hike in excise duties and value added
services and education exhibited subdued build-ups taxes (VATs), resulted in domestic petrol and diesel
(Chart II.14). pump prices reaching historical highs by February
2021 (Chart II.15b).
In H2:2020-21, crude oil prices (Indian basket)
jumped by nearly 50 per cent – from around US$ 41 The combined share of central excise and states’ value
per barrel in September 2020 to US$ 61 per barrel added tax (VAT) in petrol prices has risen from `22 per
in February 2021. This sharp rise in international litre (31 per cent) in mid-2014 and `38 per litre (54 per

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart II.13: Exclusion based CPI Inflation (y-o-y) Chart II.14: CPI excluding Food and Fuel –
Financial Year Price Buildup
(February over March)
Note: (1) Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
(2) Derived as residual from headline CPI. Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI excluding food and fuel.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates. Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
cent) in March 2020 to `53 per litre (61 per cent) in in sharp double digit deflation for most part of the
February 2021 (Chart II.16a). While the WPI measures financial year, with February 2021 seeing a reading of
basic prices less trade discounts, thereby leaving out only 0.2 per cent (Chart II.16b).
indirect taxes, retail prices are inclusive of taxes. CPI Compared to pre-COVID levels, measures of core
petrol and diesel inflation has been in double digits inflation remain elevated, indicative of significant
since July 2020 and was at 20.7 per cent in February cost-push pressures across sectors in the post-
2021; in contrast, WPI petrol and diesel prices were lockdown period. Price inflation in the goods
Chart II.15: Movements in International and Domestic Petroleum Product Prices
a: Petrol – Domestic and International Prices b: Diesel – Domestic and International Prices
Note: International petrol and diesel prices denote the spot price of Singapore gasoline and gasoil, respectively. Domestic petrol and diesel prices represent the average
pump prices of four metros as reported by Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL).
Sources: Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell (PPAC); Bloomberg; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.16: Petrol Price Build-up and Inflation Rates of Petroleum Products
a: Petrol Price Build-up* b: Petrol and Diesel Inflation (y-o-y)
*IOCL Delhi prices.
Sources: PPAC; NSO; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.
component, i.e., excluding food, fuel, petrol, diesel, per cent in August 2020, driven by health care goods
gold and silver (with a weight of 20.7 per cent in – particularly medicines, clothing and footwear
CPI) rose to 5.8 per cent in February 2021 from 4.7 goods and transportation goods like motor vehicles
Chart II.17: Contribution to CPI Inflation excluding Food, Fuel, Petrol, Diesel, Gold and Silver
a: Goods b: Services
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
(Chart II.17a). Core services inflation (weight of 23.0 which primarily includes rental charges, at 3.2 per
per cent in CPI) rose from 4.0 per cent in August 2020 cent during November 2020 - February 2021 was
to 5.0 per cent in November 2020, primarily due to lower than the pre-COVID levels; however, it was the
higher prices of recreation, education, transportation second largest contributor to core services inflation
(Chart II.17b).
and communications services. Subsequently, core
services inflation moderated to 4.3 per cent in In sum, headline inflation dynamics in the post-
January-February 2021 as inflation in prices of lockdown period were primarily driven by goods
communication dropped sharply due to favourable inflation. Services inflation is the more durable
base effects along with some moderation in education component of the CPI and drives goods inflation over
and recreation services inflation. Housing inflation, time (Box II.1).
Box II.1: CPI Goods and Services: Do they Converge after Shocks?
Cross-country evidence suggests that services inflation, 2020. In February 2021, the gap narrowed to around 30
on average, exceeds goods inflation due to a variety of bps. In the past too, there have been episodes of goods
factors such as lower productivity in non-tradable services and services inflation exhibiting divergent patterns, as
(Balassa-Samuelson effect), higher mark-ups in services during September 2016 to September 2019. Movements in
due to reduced competition and increased demand for CPI goods inflation excluding vegetables and gold and CPI
services as per capita income rises (Ferrara 2019, Zaman services inflation (barring the period influenced by the
statistical HRA12 impact), however, tend to show greater
2015). In the post-lockdown period, however, CPI goods
co-movement (Chart II.1.1).
inflation (with a weight of 76.6 per cent in the CPI basket)
exceeded CPI services (weight of 23.4 per cent) inflation For India, the evidence suggests that prices of goods and
substantially, with the gap increasing from 2.2 percentage services exhibit co-movement over time, i.e., the two
points in June 2020 to 3.8 percentage points in September series are cointegrated (Table II.1.1). This is consistent
Chart II.1.1: Goods and Services Inflation (y-o-y)
a: Goods and Services Inflation Gap b: Adjusted Goods and Services Inflation
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
(Contd.)
12 In July 2017 house rent allowances (HRA) of central government employees were increased under the 7th Central Pay Commission awards. The impact
of this lingered for more than two years as state governments also implemented changes for their employees in a staggered manner.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Table II.1.1: CPI Good and Services dynamics can be further explored through a Vector Error
Correction Model (VECM). The VECM analysis indicates a
Long-run cointegration estimates
significant error correction (EC) term in CPI goods prices,
…(1)
while it was found to be insignificant in the case of CPI
(23.98) ***
services prices. This suggests that following a shock
Note: Figures in parenthesis are t-statistics. Trace test and max-
resulting in a divergence from the long run equilibrium,
eigenvalue test indicates cointegrating relationship at 5 per cent level of
it is goods prices that make the necessary adjustment to
significance. *** denotes significance at 1 per cent level.
restore equilibrium.
Vector error correction estimates:
In(CPI goods) In(CPI services) CPI goods prices are considerably influenced by the
t t
volatility induced by perishables such as vegetables and
(–) 0.125 (+) 0.013
(ECM)
t-1 (-3.04)*** ( 0.96) can result in divergences from CPI services prices over
short periods. Services inflation, on the other hand,
(+) 0.60 (+) 0.05
In(CPI goods)
t-i (2.75)** (0.47) represents the relatively sticky component in the CPI
(–) 0.59 (+) 0.75 basket and can spill over to goods inflation, resulting in
In(CPI services)
t-i (-1.72)* (6.74)*** generalised inflationary pressures.
(+) 0.0051 (+) 0.001
c References:
(3.25)*** (1.89)*
Adj. R2 0.14 0.54 Ferrara, L. (2019), “What is Behind the Change in the
Gap between Services Price Inflation and Goods Price
Notes: Figures in parenthesis are t-statistics. *** denotes significance at
1 per cent level ** denotes significance at 5 per cent level and * denotes Inflation?”, ECB Economic Bulletin Boxes, 5.
significant at 10 per cent level. The sample period for the analysis is
January 2011-December 2019. CPI goods and CPI services are seasonally Peach, R.W., Rich, R., and Antoniades, A. (2004), “The
adjusted CPI indices of goods and services, respectively. Historical and Recent Behavior of Goods and Services
P-value for Breusch–Godfrey LM test for the null of no serial correlation Inflation”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic
(up to 5 lags): 0.15.
Policy Review, December.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
Zaman, S. (2015), “The Gap Between Services Inflation
with the cross-country evidence (Peach, 2004). Given and Goods Inflation”, Economic Trends, Federal Reserve
the evidence of long-run cointegration, the short-run Bank of Cleveland.
In addition to exclusion-based measures, trimmed Other Measures of Inflation
means of inflation provide a measure of underlying
Inflation measured by sectoral CPIs for agricultural
inflation dynamics and are computed by statistically
labourers (CPI-AL) and rural labourers (CPI-
eliminating items with extremely positive and
RL) remained below headline CPI inflation in
negative inflation. The trimmed mean indicators
H2:2020-21. Lower inflation in food items along
showed easing of inflation over the period under
with their higher weight in CPI-AL and CPI-RL and
review in view of the omission of a few large outliers –
subdued inflation in fuel, and clothing and footwear
such as vegetables, pulses, edible oils, transport fare, groups contributed to the relatively lower inflation
and pan, tobacco and intoxicants – in either direction. prints for CPI-AL and CPI-RL. Inflation in terms of
In contrast, exclusion-based measures, which capture CPI for industrial workers (CPI-IW) though their gap
persistent trends in inflation by eliminating ex-ante narrowed. also remained below the headline CPI
identified idiosyncratic and volatile components, during H2.13 The price build-up in CPI-IW for clothing,
suggest stickiness in inflation (Charts II.13 and II.18). housing and miscellaneous groups was lower relative
13 The Labour Bureau revised the base year of CPI for industrial workers (CPI-IW) from 2001 to 2016 in September 2020, based on the Working-Class Family
Income & Expenditure Survey (WCFI&ES). The series covers 88 centres (78 in the earlier series), uses geometric mean for aggregation of price quotations
(instead of arithmetic mean in the earlier series), and covers a larger number of items (463 items as against 392).

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
WPI inflation also remained below CPI inflation
Chart II.18: Trimmed Means of CPI Inflation
in H2:2020-21, although it has quickly inched up
(y-o-y)
close to CPI inflation in recent months (Charts II.
19a). From its trough in May 2020, WPI inflation
charted a V-shaped uptrend in view of a sharp rise
in fuel and non-food commodity prices. In contrast,
WPI food inflation decelerated continuously from
September 2020 and fell into negative territory in
January 2021 before moving up in February 2021
to 3.3 per cent. Average WPI food inflation during
September 2020 to February 2021 at 3.7 per cent was
way lower than average CPI food inflation at 6.6 per
cent, with inflation across major food sub-groups,
except vegetables, milk and products, oils and fats,
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates. recording lower prints in the WPI than in the CPI.
The largest deviation between CPI and WPI emanated
to the headline CPI; that of fuel, and pan, tobacco and from inflation in petroleum products, especially
intoxicants groups was higher; and the fall in food
in petrol and diesel, reflecting the wedge due to
prices was muted.14
tax components. Similarly, tax implications were
Chart II.19: Alternative Measures of Inflation
a: Various Measures of Inflation (y-o-y) b: CPI-WPI Divergence : Select Commodities (Average
during September 2020 - February 2021)
Sources: NSO; Labour Bureau; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.
14 Inflation for major groups of CPI-IW cannot be worked out as the linking factor released by the Labour Bureau is only for headline index and not at the
group level; therefore, the discussion is based on price build-ups.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
visible in prices for pan, tobacco and intoxicants – Within farm sector inputs, fodder price inflation
while CPI for these items remained in double digits remained elevated in double digits, during October
(average 10.7 per cent), inflation in WPI beverages, 2020 to February 2021 due to the damage from excess
and tobacco products averaged 0.2 and 2.5 per cent, rains during September-October 2020. Inflation in
respectively, during September 2020 to February fertilisers remained muted in line with subdued
2021 (Chart II.19b). cost of raw materials such as natural gas. Prices of
Inflation measured in terms of gross value added electricity – a key constituent of both industrial and
(GVA) and gross domestic product (GDP) deflators farm inputs – remained in deflation on an average
clocked a pick-up from Q1:2020-21 to Q3, broadly in during H2, barring a transient spike in November.
alignment with WPI inflation. Inflation in prices of agricultural machinery and
implements recorded a modest increase during
II.3 Costs
November 2020-February 2021.
The measures of cost inflation – farm inputs and
industrial raw materials derived from WPI – moved Nominal rural wages for both agricultural and non-
higher with the gradual unlocking of the economy, agricultural labourers hardened during H1:2020-21,
albeit with transient dips (Chart II.20). The firming up reflecting labour shortages during the lockdown
of global crude oil prices during H2:2020-21 impacted period and the hike in wages by `20 under the
the prices of inputs such as high-speed diesel, naptha, Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
aviation turbine fuel, and furnace oil. Minerals and Guarantee (MGNREGA) scheme effective April 1, 2020.
non-food articles also generally rose during October As the unlock phase progressed and labour availability
2020-February 2021. Prices of fibres emerged out of improved, wage growth moderated in H2 although it
deflation in January 2021 in line with a pick-up in raw remained higher than in the pre-lockdown period
cotton and raw silk prices. Reflecting this, inflation in (Chart II.21).
cotton yarn price registered sharp uptick.
Growth in the value of production in Q3:2020-
21 for listed firms in the manufacturing and
Chart II.20: Farm and Non-farm Input
Cost Inflation (y-o-y) services sectors outpaced the rise in staff costs. As
a result, unit labour costs (measured as a ratio of
staff cost to value of production) decreased during
Q3:2020-21, reverting towards pre-COVID levels.
Unit labour costs moderated from 6.9 per cent in
Q2:2020-21 to 6.4 per cent in Q3:2020-21 for firms
in the manufacturing sector and from 31.4 per cent
to 28.5 per cent respectively, for the services sector
firms (Chart II.22).
Manufacturing, services and infrastructure
*: Comprise primary non-food articles, minerals, coal, aviation turbine fuel, high firms polled in Reserve Bank’s enterprise
speed diesel, naphtha, bitumen, furnace oil, lube oil, petroleum coke, electricity,
cotton yarn and paper and pulp from WPI. surveys15 reported an increase in salary outgo in
$: Comprise high speed diesel, fodder, electricity, fertilisers, pesticides, and
agricultural and forestry machinery from WPI. Q4:2020-21, with expectations of a further rise in
Sources: Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.
Q1:2021-22 as the level of employment is likely to
15 Industrial Outlook Survey; and Services and Infrastructure Outlook Survey.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart II.21: Wage Growth and Inflation in Rural Areas (y-o-y)
Sources: NSO; Labour Bureau; and RBI staff estimates.
gradually edge up. Input costs were also expected to of 2021-22 with the pace of increase moderating a
intensify further in Q1 and continue in Q2 and Q3 tad for the manufacturing sector. The surveyed firms
reported passing through the costs to their selling
prices in Q4:2020-21. Selling prices are expected to
Chart II.22: Labour Cost in Manufacturing and
Services: Staff Cost Per Unit Value of Production gain further traction in Q1:2021-22 and remain firm
in Q2 and Q3 for all the three sectors (Chart II.23).
Manufacturing firms polled for the purchasing
managers’ index (PMI) reported an increase in input
prices in Q3:2020-21, with a further firming up in
Q4 from higher costs of chemicals, metals, minerals,
cotton and plastic; higher cost pressures were passed
through to the clients resulting in an increase in selling
prices. PMI services firms also reported continued
increase in input prices in Q3 and Q4, driven by
fuel, with the sharpest increase reported in prices of
consumer services. Despite an increase in input costs,
services sector firms reported lower selling prices in
Sources: Capitaline database; and RBI staff estimates.
efforts to boost sales.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.23: Expectations of Cost Conditions (Net Response)
a: Salary Outgo b: Cost of Inputs c: Selling Prices
Note: ‘Net response’ is the difference between the percentage of respondents reporting increase in prices and those reporting decrease.
Sources: Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey; Services & Infrastructure Outlook Survey; and RBI staff estimates.
II.4 Conclusion
in trade and transport costs, taxi and auto fares, and
In 2020-21, inflation breached the upper tolerance its second-round effects could push-up the prices of
band of 6 per cent for six consecutive months in goods and services further in a broad-based manner,
the post-lockdown period (June-November 2020) with firms regaining pricing power. Effective supply
due to a series of cost-push shocks – supply chain measures and tax rationalisation are critical to help
disruptions; weather shocks; higher crude oil and anchor inflation expectations. If inflation remains
other commodity prices; and higher taxes. Inflationary close to the target on a durable basis, it can then
pressures persisted despite a bumper kharif harvest. provide monetary policy the space to adequately
The increase in petrol and diesel prices is showing up support the nascent recovery.

III. Demand and Output
After the unprecedented contraction in Q1, real gross domestic product (GDP) recorded sequential upturn in
Q2 and regained positive territory in Q3 with the ambit of the recovery broadening to encompass a wider spectrum
of sectors, supported by a significant decline in COVID-19 infections. The recent increase in COVID infections,
if not contained, could push back the normalisation process and impede the broader revival of economic activity.
Economic activity in India in H2:2020-21 turned out (GVA) recorded positive growth in Q3 and is expected
to be more resilient than anticipated in the October to be positive in Q4 also.
2020 MPR, supported by a significant decline in new
III.1 Aggregate Demand
COVID-19 infections from the mid-September 2020
Real GDP contracted by 8.0 per cent in 2020-21,
peak and the rollout of the vaccination drive from mid-
according to the National Statistical Office’s (NSO)
January 2021. After the unprecedented contraction
second advance estimates (SAE), although some slack
in Q1, real gross domestic product (GDP) recorded
can be attributed to on-budgeting of past subsidy
sequential upturn in Q2 and regained positive territory
payments in Q4 (Chart III.1a and Table III.1).
in Q3 with the ambit of the recovery broadening to
encompass a wider spectrum of sectors since then. The recovery in H2:2020-21 was on the back of revival
On the supply side too, the sustained resilience of in government expenditure and fixed investment and
agriculture and allied activities was complemented easing of the contraction in private consumption.
by manufacturing and services sector activity gaining Quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised
some momentum. As a result, real gross value added (qoq-SAAR) growth rates, however, moderated in Q3
Chart III.1: GDP Growth and its Constituents
a: Weighted Contribution of the Components t o b: GDP Growth and Momentum
GDP Growth
Note: 1. # - Implicit growth. 2. SAAR – Seasonally adjusted annualised rate.
Sources: National Statistical Office (NSO) and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Table III.1: Real GDP Growth
(y-o-y, per cent)
Item 2019-20 2020-21 Weighted 2019-20 2020-21
Contribution*
2019-20 2020-21 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4#
Private final consumption expenditure 5.5 -9.0 3.1 -5.1 7.6 6.5 6.4 2.0 -26.3 -11.3 -2.4 3.1
Government final consumption expenditure 7.9 2.9 0.8 0.3 1.8 9.6 8.9 12.1 12.8 -24.0 -1.1 29.2
Gross fixed capital formation 5.4 -12.4 1.7 -4.0 13.3 3.9 2.4 2.5 -46.4 -6.8 2.6 2.8
Exports -3.3 -8.1 -0.7 -1.6 3.0 -1.3 -5.4 -8.8 -22.0 -2.1 -4.6 -3.7
Imports -0.8 -17.6 -0.2 -4.0 9.4 -1.7 -7.5 -2.7 -41.1 -18.2 -4.6 -4.3
GDP at market prices 4.0 -8.0 4.0 -8.0 5.4 4.6 3.3 3.0 -24.4 -7.3 0.4 -1.1
*: Component-wise contributions to growth do not add up to GDP growth because change in stocks, valuables and discrepancies are not included,
#: Implicit growth.
Source: National Statistical Office (NSO).
and Q4 suggesting some flattening of momentum faster than anticipated reduction in new COVID-19
(Chart III.1b). infections in the country. The upside surprise in Q2
and Q3 largely stemmed from a better-than-expected
GDP Projections versus Actual Outcomes
performance in gross fixed capital formation. Data for
The October 2020 Monetary Policy Report (MPR)
Q4:2020-21 are expected on May 31, 2021.
projected GDP growth at (-) 9.8 per cent for Q2:2020-
III.1.1 Private Final Consumption Expenditure
21, (-) 5.6 per cent for Q3 and 0.5 per cent for Q4,
with risks tilted to the downside. Actual outcomes in Private final consumption expenditure (PFCE) – the
terms of the NSO’s SAE overshot these projections by mainstay of aggregate demand, severely dented during
250 and 600 basis points in Q2 and Q3, respectively the pandemic – revived in H2:2020-21 as spending
(Chart III.2), which may be largely attributed to expanded from essential commodities and services
towards discretionary items on the back of gradual
relaxation of restrictions. The contraction in real PFCE
Chart III.2: GDP Growth - Projections
moderated to 2.4 per cent in Q3 from 11.3 per cent
versus Actual
in Q2. Spending on transport, hotels and restaurants,
recreation and culture, which together contribute
around 20 per cent to PFCE, also began improving
in Q4. Several high frequency indicators of private
consumption crossed pre-COVID levels, attesting to a
broad-based momentum.
Drilling down further reveals a divergence between
urban and rural demand, with the former suffering
the maximum damage and taking longer time to
recover due to the loss of employment and heightened
uncertainty. Some coincident and proximate high
frequency indicators show that urban consumption
started inching up from Q3:2020-21 and gained further
strength in Q4 with the easing of restrictions. Passenger
Sources: NSO and RBI staff estimates.
vehicle sales remained robust since August and posted

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart III.3: Consumption Demand: High Frequency Indicators
a: High Frequency Indicators - Urban Demand b: Household Credit
Sources: Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM); NSO; and RBI.
double-digit growth in January and February 2021, remained in expansion zone since August 2020 (Chart
partly reflecting shifting of preferences towards own III.4). The consumer non-durables output witnessed
vehicles over public transportation in the wake of the expansion in December 2020, before contracting in
pandemic. The production of consumer durables, that January 2021.
had collapsed during H1, got revitalised and surpassed
Unemployment rates in both rural and urban areas
pre-COVID levels in December 2020 (Chart III.3a).
recorded declines during H2 and supported private
Credit card outstanding and other personal loans,
consumption. The labour force participation rate
however, remained subdued (Chart III.3b). Domestic
improved considerably in H2 vis-à-vis H1 but remains
air passenger traffic, is still tepid and around two-
third of pre-COVID-19 levels, reflecting lackluster
Chart III.4: Select Indicators - Rural Demand
activity related to tourism and entertainment, and
with business meetings increasingly preferring the
virtual mode.
Rural consumption recouped quickly and remained
resilient on the back of record kharif production,
sustained employment under the Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act (MGNREGA), and cash transfers under PM
Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana and other schemes.
The households that sought employment under
the MGNREGA scheme were 63 per cent higher in
Q3:2020-21 and remained elevated in Q4. Indicators
of rural demand – improved rabi acreage during
2020-21; higher production of fertilisers; and
accelerated tractor sales during November-February –
Sources: Tractor Manufactures Association; Society of Indian Automobile
augur well for a brighter outlook. Motorcycle sales have Manufacturers (SIAM); and NSO.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.5: Evolving Employment Situation in India
a: Number of Employed Workers-CMIE b: Naukri JobSpeak Hiring Index
Consumer Pyramid
c: Net Payroll Additions based on EPFO Records d: Unemployment and Labour Participation Rates
Source: CMIE, EPFO and Naukari.com.
below pre-COVID levels. Nonetheless, the available in Q4. For the full year 2020-21, GFCF is estimated
data from different sources indicate that employment to have contracted by 12.4 per cent, given the sharp
conditions have improved considerably in H2 downturn in H1. The share of GFCF in aggregate GDP
(Chart III.5). inched up to 32.8 per cent in H2 from 28.5 per cent
in H1 and 31.9 per cent in H2:2019-20. Real estate
III.1.2 Gross Fixed Capital Formation
and construction activity gained some momentum
The upturn in fixed investment gained traction during from Q3 – particularly in rural and semi-urban areas
H2:2020-21, although it continues to be weighed down and affordable segments in urban areas – benefitting
by surplus capacity and uncertainty surrounding from lower mortgage rates, favourable pricing and a
the outlook. Congenial financial conditions are slash in stamp duty across several states. Among its
expected to continue supporting the recovery in fixed proximate coincident indicators, steel consumption
investment (Box III.1). Gross fixed capital formation rose at a robust pace in January and February 2021
(GFCF) expanded by 2.6 per cent on year-on-year on top of double-digit growth in the preceding two
basis in Q3 and is estimated to rise by 2.8 per cent months. Investment in machinery and equipment is

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Box III.1: Investment and Financial Conditions
Domestic financial conditions eased considerably with the
Chart III.1.2: FCI and GFCF Growth
onset of the pandemic as reflected in large drops in interest
rates/spreads across the spectrum and ample surplus
liquidity in the system on the back of conventional and
unconventional policy measures by the Reserve Bank. The
availability and cost of finance are amongst the important
drivers of investment. A financial condition index (FCI)
that is a summary indicator of financial conditions, helps
to gauge their impact on investment activity.
Following Kongsamut et. al. (2017), a FCI for India is
constructed with variables drawn from equity, debt, money
and forex markets. Using data from Q1:2002 to Q1:2020,
the FCI includes the following five standardised variables
– government securities (G-Sec) 10-year benchmark yield, Source: RBI staff estimates.
corporate AAA bond spread over G-Sec yield, Nifty-50
return, repo rate and net foreign portfolio inflows – based
exhibit broadly similar directional changes (Chart III.1.2).
on a preliminary analysis of their correlation and impact
The FCIs capture the tightening of financial conditions
on investment.
during the global financial crisis in 2008 and later in
Dynamic factor model (DFM)1 and vector auto regression 2012-13 (associated with the period of high inflation
(VAR)2 approaches are used to construct FCIs (FCI1 and and monetary tightening) as well as the recent easing of
FCI2, respectively) for a robust analysis. Negative values financial conditions after the pandemic. In terms of the
of FCIs denote easier financial conditions while positive DFM-based FCI, financial conditions at present are at their
values indicate tighter financial conditions. Both the FCIs easiest since 2003.
Both the measures of FCIs are negatively correlated
(statistically significant) with growth in gross fixed
Chart III.1.1: GFCF Trend and Cycle
capital formation (GFCF) and the correlation is higher
for lagged FCI, i.e., the easing of financial conditions is
associated with a subsequent rise in investment growth
(Table III.I.1). Granger causality tests confirm that the
Table III.I.1: Correlation Coefficient of FCIs with
Investment Growth (y-o-y)
FCI1 FCI2
Lag 0 -0.26* -0.52*
Lag 1 -0.43* -0.57*
Lag 2 -0.57* -0.59*
Lag 3 -0.61* -0.52*
Lag 4 -0.54* -0.38*
* indicates significant at 1% level
Source: RBI staff estimates. (Contd.)
1 DFM is applied as dimension reduction technique using factor analyser module of Python. Bartlett’s test of sphericity indicates that the dataset is not
an identity matrix; Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) measure of sampling adequacy is found to be greater than 0.6. The maximum likelihood (ML) method is
used to fit factors to the observed data with visual scree plot analysis to decide on using 2 factors.
2 The VAR model is run on the same set of variables and the weights are derived from impulse response functions as cumulative impact on investment
in 8 subsequent quarters to construct FCI2.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Table III.I.2: Granger Causality Test
Hypothesis FCI1 (DFM) FCI2 (VAR)
F-statistic Prob F-statistic Prob
FCI does not Granger cause investment growth 2.04 0.14 3.76*** 0.03
FCI (-1) does not Granger cause investment growth 1.54 0.22 1.08 0.34
FCI (-2) does not Granger cause investment growth 2.45*** 0.09 2.33 0.11
FCI (-3) does not Granger cause investment growth 0.37 0.69 0.29 0.75
FCI (-4) does not Granger cause investment growth 0.02 0.98 0.39 0.68
***indicates significant at 10% level.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
financial conditions have a statistical significant impact conditions in supporting investment activity is also
on investment growth (Table.I.2). The role of financial corroborated by regression analysis with controls for
expected economic activity (Table III.I.3).
Table III.I.3: Regression Estimates
References:
Dependent Variable: Investment Growth
Hatzius, J., Hooper, P., Mishkin, F., Schoenholtz, K.,
Coefficient t-Statistic
Watson, M. (2010), ‘Financial Conditions Indexes: A Fresh
Investment growth (-1) 0.54 4.67*
FCI1(-2) -3.05 -2.98* Look after the Financial Crisis’, NBER Working Papers, No.
GDP growth(+2) 0.58 2.69*
16150.
Constant 0.27 0.14
R2 0.59
Kongsamut, P., C. Mumssen, A. Paret, T. Tressel (2017),
Prob (J-statistic) 0.79
Q-statistic (upto 4 lags) (p-value) 0.23 ‘Incorporating Macro-Financial Linkages into Forecasts
*: Significant at 1 per cent level. Using Financial Conditions Indices: The Case of France’
The equation is estimated through generalised method of moments approach with IMF Working Paper No. 17/269.
the following instruments: lags of the endogenous variables as well as lag of world
GDP growth, Brent crude prices and annual deviation rainfall in India from its long Gulati, S., Ghosh, B., Deepmala and Kumar, S. (2021),
period average.
‘Investment and Financial Conditions’, Mimeo.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
also recovering as reflected by imports of capital goods (Chart III.6a). The production of capital goods attained
remaining in the positive zone since December 2020 positive territory in December 2020 but shrank in
Chart III.6: Investment Demand
a: Indicators of Investment Demand b: Capacity Utilisation in Manufacturing
Sources: DGCI&S; NSO; and RBI.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
January 2021. The capacity utilisation (CU) in the
Chart III.7: Interest Coverage Ratio
manufacturing sector improved to 66.6 per cent in Q3
from the previous quarter (Chart III.6b). Seasonally
adjusted CU also increased to 65.2 per cent in Q3 from
64.4 per cent in the previous quarter.
Half-yearly unaudited financial statements of listed
non-government non-financial (NGNF) companies
indicate that companies reduced their assets and
used funds to reduce liabilities and build-up cash
holdings – the former signifying deleveraging while
the latter is indicative of precautionary saving in
uncertain times. The debt to equity ratio of these firms
dropped by 4.4 percentage points to 39.7 per cent in
Note: Data for Q3:2020-21 are based on results of 1,685 listed private
H1:2020-21, although it was still higher than its manufacturing companies and 678 listed private non-financial services
companies.
level in the previous two years. Investment by these
Source: RBI staff estimates.
companies remained subdued (Table III.2). At the
same time, the interest coverage ratio of listed non-
utilisation under the government’s Emergency Credit
financial private companies increased in Q3, indicating
Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) to meet working
improved debt servicing capacity of these companies
capital requirements. As on February 28, 2021, the
(Chart III.7). The deleveraging and improved debt
utilisation under ECLGS stood at 82 per cent. The
service capacity along with congenial financial
PLI, covering 13 sectors with a commitment of the
conditions, recovery in capacity utilisation,
government support amounting to nearly `1.97 lakh
resuscitation of private consumption and the
crore, has begun attracting investment, including
expanded scope of the Production-Linked Incentive
FDI, in the manufacturing sector. The significantly
(PLI) Scheme offer a conducive environment for
higher allocation for capital expenditure in the
capex spending by non-financial private companies.
Union Budget 2021-22 is expected to crowd in private
Bank lending to micro, small and medium enterprises
investment, and hence, augurs well for the revival of
(MSMEs) segment has improved with increased
the private sector investment cycle. At the same time,
possible stress in the balance sheet of banks – once
Table III.2: Listed Private Manufacturing Companies
special dispensations related to moratorium, asset
(Per cent)
classification and restructuring wane – could weigh
Period Debt to Debt to Cash to Fixed Assets
on the investment outlook. Capital infusion and
Equity Assets Total Assets (y-o-y growth)
Ratio Ratio Ratio efficient and effective handling of loan delinquencies
H2:2017-18 36.9 19.3 2.9 should be accorded priority, so that impediment to
H1:2018-19 37.9 19.5 2.6
H2:2018-19 37.7 19.8 3.0 4.6 credit availability does not undermine revival in the
H1:2019-20 34.7 18.6 3.1 7.8 investment cycle.
H2:2019-20 44.1 21.9 3.8 8.2
H1:2020-21 39.7 21.0 4.7 2.1
As per the first revised estimates for 2019-20, the gross
Note: Based on data of 1,249 common listed private manufacturing domestic saving rate increased to 31.4 per cent of GDP
companies.
Source: RBI staff estimates. from 30.6 per cent a year ago. Net household financial

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.8: Saving Investment Gap Table III.3: Key Fiscal Indicators –
Central Government Finances
Indicator Per cent to GDP
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
(RE) (BE)
1. Revenue receipts 8.3 8.0 8.0
a. Tax revenue (Net) 6.7 6.9 6.9
b. Non-Tax revenue 1.6 1.1 1.1
2. Non-debt capital receipts 0.3 0.2 0.8
3. Revenue expenditure 11.6 15.5 13.1
a. Interest payments 3.0 3.6 3.6
b. Major subsidies 1.1 3.1 1.5
4. Revenue expenditure excluding 7.3 8.6 7.8
interest payments and subsidies
5. Capital expenditure 1.7 2.3 2.5
6. Capital outlay 1.5 1.7 2.3
7. Total expenditure 13.2 17.7 15.6
8. Gross fiscal deficit 4.6 9.5 6.8
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates. 9. Revenue deficit 3.3 7.5 5.1
10. Primary deficit 1.6 5.9 3.1
Sources: Union Budget 2021-22 and RBI staff estimates.
saving – a major source of funds for the economy –
increased to 8.0 per cent of GDP in 2019-20 from 7.2 in H2. Excluding government expenditure, the
per cent in the preceding year. While the public sector economy would have recorded a contraction of 9.3
per cent in 2020-21. In 2021-22, the growth in revenue
was reliant on household surpluses for financing
expenditure excluding interest and subsidy payments
its deficit, the private sector depended primarily on
has been budgeted at 4.8 per cent, considerably on
internal resources for financing its investment needs
the lower side as compared with 13.1 per cent in
(Chart III.8). According to preliminary estimates, the
2020-21 (RE), indicating lower support to aggregate
household financial savings rate spiked to 21.0 per
demand (Table III.3).
cent of GDP in Q1:2020-21 as consumption waned
amidst lockdowns and nearly normalised back to 10.4 During 2020-21, the fiscal position of the central
per cent in Q2 as consumption recovered reinforced government remained under stress due to revenue
by pent-up demand3. shortfalls and increase in COVID-19-related
discretionary spending. Revenue collections gathered
III.1.3 Government Expenditure
pace in H2, however, on the back of the pick-up in
The contraction in Government Final Consumption economic activity. The centre’s net tax revenue
Expenditure (GFCE) narrowed sharply from 24.0 per increased by 9.1 per cent during April-February
cent during Q2 to 1.1 per cent in Q3. GFCE support to 2020-21 and stood at 90.4 per cent of revised estimates
aggregate demand revived in Q4 (the implicit growth (RE) for the full year (Chart III.9). Except excise and
in the SAE of NSO is 29.2 per cent). Overall, the fiscal customs duties, tax collections witnessed declines
support to aggregate demand remained substantial across the board.
3 Hansda, Sanjay Kumar, Anupam Prakash, Anand Prakash Ekka and Ishu Thakur (2021), “Q2:2020-21 Estimates of Household Financial Savings and
Household Debt-GDP Ratio”, RBI Bulletin, March.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart III.9: Tax Collections
a: Direct Taxes b: Indirect Taxes
Source: Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance.
Total GST collections were severely hit by the Total tax revenue is budgeted to be higher in 2021-22
lockdown during H1:2020-21 but crossed the than in the previous year (Table III.4).
previous year’s level from September 2020 onwards
The revenue expenditure for the full year 2020-21 was
(Chart III.10). In March 2021, GST collections were
revised upward by 14.5 per cent from the BE, mainly
recorded at `1.24 lakh crore. Direct tax collections
due to spending on major subsides. Outgoes on food
during April-February 2020-21 were 81.6 per cent of
subsidy in RE were over three and half times of the BE
RE, down by 9.9 per cent over the previous year’s level.
(2.2 per cent of GDP) because of distribution of free
foodgrains to over 80 crore people and on-budgeting of
Chart III.10: GST Collections past subsidy payments to the Food Corporation of India
Table III.4: Central Government Tax Collections
Indicator Per cent to GDP
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
(RE) (BE)
1. Direct tax 5.1 4.6 5.0
(i) Corporation 2.7 2.3 2.5
(ii) Income 2.4 2.3 2.5
2. Indirect tax 4.6 5.1 5.0
(i) GST 2.9 2.6 2.8
(ii) Customs 0.5 0.6 0.6
(iii) Excise 1.2 1.8 1.5
3. Gross tax revenue (1+2) 9.7 9.7 9.9
4. Net tax revenue 6.6 6.9 6.9
Source: CGA. Note: BE: Budget Estimates. RE: Revised Estimates.
Source: Union Budget, 2021-22.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.11: Growth in Revenue and Capital Chart III.12: Revenue Expenditure and
Expenditure during 2020-21 Capital Outlay
#: Implicit
Source: RBI staff estimates. Source: RBI staff estimates.
(FCI) in the form of National Small Saving Fund (NSSF) allocation for capital expenditure has been budgeted
loans. The revenue expenditure, excluding interest higher by 26.2 per cent, while revenue expenditure is
and subsidy payments, is estimated to step-up by 33.6 budgeted to fall by 2.7 per cent in 2021-22. The capital
per cent in Q4 (Chart III.11). The capital expenditure of outlay (i.e., capital expenditure excluding loans and
the central government also inched up by 6.6 per cent advances) is budgeted to edge up to 2.3 per cent of
in RE 2020-21 from BE on the back of higher spending GDP in 2021-22 (BE) from 1.7 per cent in 2020-21(RE)
on central sector schemes, railways, defence, transfers (Chart III.12). The Union Budget 2021-22 expected the
to the States, health and MSMEs. Higher capital fiscal deficit (FD) to decline to 6.8 per cent of GDP and
expenditure in RE that is attributed to discretionary to 4.5 per cent by 2025-26.
spending gave a thrust to fixed investment in the
Based on data for 24 states for April-January 2020-
economy. The increased government expenditure
21, states’ consolidated revenue receipts contracted
reflects the fiscal policy push necessitated by the
largely due to downturn in own tax revenue, central
pandemic to save lives and livelihood and nurture
tax transfer and own non-tax revenue. Consolidated
the economic recovery. Reflecting decline in revenues
revenue receipts, however, made a turnaround in
and higher expenditures, the fiscal deficit (FD) and
H2 (October-January 2020-21) due to revival in GST
revenue deficit (RD) edged up considerably to 9.5
collections. Despite COVID-19 related spending,
per cent and 7.5 per cent of GDP, respectively in
states’ revenue expenditure (excluding interest
2020-21(RE).
payments and subsidies) rose marginally during April-
The Union Budget 2021-22 gave an impetus to growth January due to expenditure rationalisation. Capital
through increased outlays for capital expenditure. expenditure after contracting in H1, posted a robust
Although total expenditure is budgeted to grow growth in H2 (October-January 2020-21), reflecting a
by only 1 per cent, the increased focus on capital qualitative improvement in expenditure composition.
expenditure that has multiplier effects would boost For 2021-22, the consolidated GFD (for 12 states for
overall investment and growth in the economy. The which data are available) is budgeted at 3.7 per cent of

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Table III.5: State Government Finances - Key Chart III.13: Funding of Centre's Fiscal Deficit
Deficit Indicators
(per cent of GSDP)
Item 2019-20 2020-21 2020-21 2021-22
(BE) (RE) (BE)
Revenue deficit 0.1 0.1 1.7 0.5
Primary deficit 0.7 1.1 2.4 1.8
Gross fiscal deficit 2.3 2.6 4.2 3.7
Notes: 1. Data pertain to 12 states out of 28 States and 3 Union
Territories that have presented their Budgets for 2021-22.
2. GSDP is the sum of GSDP of the respective 12 states.
Source: Budget Documents of State Governments.
GSDP during 2021-22 as against 4.2 per cent in 2020-
21(RE) (Table III.5).
The Reserve Bank of India completed the central
government’s market borrowing programme for
Sources: Government of India; and RBI staff estimates.
2020-21 successfully and in a non-disruptive manner
(Table III.6). Despite a sharp increase in the quantum of
the borrowings, ample surplus liquidity, regular open Eleven tranches of switch operations amounting
market operations (OMO) including special OMOs, to `1.53 lakh crore were undertaken during 2020-
regulatory measures and forward guidance enabled 21, aiming at managing rollover risk and enhancing
the government to complete its borrowings at a 16- liquidity of government securities.
year low weighted average cost – 5.79 per cent during
The Union Budget 2021-22 has placed net market
2020-21 as compared with 6.84 per cent in 2019-20
borrowings through G-Sec at `9.2 lakh crore, lower
– along with the highest weighted average maturity.
than in 2020-21 (RE). Market borrowings are slated
States’ gross borrowings of `7.98 lakh crore, also
to finance 61 per cent of the centre’s fiscal deficit
significantly higher than normal, were completed at a
in 2021-22(BE), higher than 57 per cent in RE 2020-
weighted average cost of 6.52 per cent during 2020-21.
21 (Chart III.13). Gross market borrowings of the
central government through dated securities have
Table III.6: Centre’s Borrowings
been planned at `7.24 lakh crore in H1:2021-22 (60
(` Lakh Crore)
per cent of the total budgeted amount for 2021-22).
Item 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
The ways and means advances (WMA) limit for the
(RE) (BE)
I Net borrowings (G-Sec) 4.7 10.5 9.2 central government has been fixed at `1.20 lakh
Repayments 2.4 2.3 2.9
crore for H1:2021-22 to enable seamless bridging
Gross borrowings (G-Sec) 7.1 12.8 12.1
II T-Bills/Cash management bills (Net) 1.5 2.2 0.5 of intermittent mismatch between receipts and
III Net market borrowings (I+II) 6.2 12.7 9.7 payments on account of leads and lags.
IV Securities against small savings 2.4 4.8 3.9
V State provident fund 0.1 0.2 0.2 III.1.4 External Demand
VI Other receipts 0.4 0.4 0.5
VII External debt 0.1 0.5 0 With the global economy gradually emerging from one
VIII Total debt (III to VII) 9.3 18.7 14.4
of its deepest recessions, India’s exports surpassed
IX Drawdown on cash balances 0.1 -0.2 0.7
X Total funding (VIII+IX) 9.4 18.5 15.1 the pre-pandemic level and entered the expansionary
Sources: Government of India; and RBI staff estimates. zone from December 2020. Imports contraction

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.14: India's Merchandise Trade
Sources: Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCI&S) and RBI staff estimates.
became softer in H2:2020-21 and eventually turned in merchandise imports moderated to 4.7 per cent in
positive from December 2020 after a gap of 9 months Q3:2020-21 from 52.9 per cent in Q1 (Chart III.15b).
(Chart III.14). The positive contribution of net external In February 2021, merchandise imports rose by
demand to y-o-y growth fell in Q3 with improvement 7.0 per cent, registering an expansion for the third
in imports outpacing exports. The contribution of net consecutive month. The rebound in non-oil non-gold
external demand to growth is estimated to improve imports has been broad-based, with major sectors
in Q4. including electronic goods, machinery, chemicals, and
pearls and precious stones reaching pre-COVID levels
According to data released by the Directorate General
in December 2020 (Chart III.15d). Gold imports rose
of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCI&S),
by 38.0 per cent in Q3 and 124 per cent in February
the pace of contraction in India’s merchandise
2021. Overall, merchandise imports contracted by
exports, which peaked in Q1:2020-21 due to the
disruptions caused by the COVID-19, moderated 23.1 per cent in April-February 2020-21. With imports
in Q2 and Q3 on the back of a gradual recovery in contracting faster than exports, the merchandise
global demand conditions. Merchandise exports trade deficit nearly halved to US$ 84.6 billion in
expanded for the third month in a row in February April-February 2020-21 from US$151.4 billion in the
2021 (Chart III.15 a). Non-oil exports rose by 3.1 per corresponding period a year ago. Going forward,
cent in Q3 and 7.5 per cent during January-February India’s oil import bill may edge up due to the rise in
2021 (Chart III.15c). At the disaggregated level, international crude oil prices since November 2020 in
drugs and pharmaceuticals, iron ore and agricultural the face of rebalancing of global oil supply-demand
products pushed up non-oil export growth. Overall, conditions.
during April-February 2020-21, merchandise exports
Turning to the services sector, the initial setback
contracted by 12.2 per cent.
to the exports of services in Q1:2020-21 waned
With the gradual opening up of the economy and gradually in view of the resilience of software exports
revival of domestic demand, the pace of contraction (Chart III.16). While travel and transport sector and

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart III.15: Relative Contribution to Export and Import Growth
a: Relative Contribution: Exports b: Relative Contribution: Imports
c: Major Drivers of Exports in H2:2020-21*: d: Major Drivers of Imports in H2:2020-21*:
Relative Contribution Relative Contribution
Note: *:H2: October-February 2020-21.
Sources: DGCI&S and RBI staff estimates.
trade-related services were adversely impacted Chart III.16: Services Trade
due to the global lockdown restrictions, domestic
information technology (IT) companies benefitted
from demand from international customers and
increasingly adopted new models for IT and other work
operations in the wake of the pandemic. Remittances
recorded sequential improvement in Q2 and Q3 with
the phased normalisation of global economic activity.
While the current account surplus was 3.0 per cent of
GDP in H1, the rising trade deficit pushed the current
account back into deficit in Q3.
Net capital flows remained robust in 2020-21
supported by foreign direct investment (FDI) and
foreign portfolio investment (FPI) on growing
Source: DGCI&S.
optimism about India’s growth prospects. Driven

Chapter III Demand and Output
primarily by megadeals in the digital and retail
Chart III.17: Net Foreign Direct and
sectors, net FDI at US$ 44.3 billion during April- Portfolio Investment
January 2020-21 was higher than US$ 36.3 billion
a year ago. The sharp upturn in net purchases by
portfolio investors in the equity segment during H2
resulted in net FPI inflows at US$ 37.1 billion during
2020-21 (up to March 30) as against an outflow of
US$ 5.2 billion during the same period last year
(Chart III.17). While the accommodative monetary
policies of major central banks improved the
appetite for risk among global portfolio investors,
robust earnings reported by domestic corporate
sector, positive sentiments on COVID vaccination
and optimism on domestic growth also helped in
attracting record FPI inflows. Despite purchases by *: Upto March 30, 2021
Sources: NSDL; and RBI.
FPIs in the debt market in H2:2020-21, there was
a cumulative net outflow at US$ 0.5 billion from
III.2 Aggregate Supply
this segment in 2020-21 (up to March 30). External
commercial borrowings recorded net outflows during Gross value added (GVA) – the measure of aggregate
April-January 2020 partly due to pre-payments. Net supply – contracted by 6.5 per cent in 2020-21 as per
flows under non-resident deposits, however, surged the SAE released by the NSO. GVA posted a growth of
during the period. As on March 26, 2021, India’s 1.8 per cent in H2:2020-21 in contrast to a downturn
foreign exchange reserves amounted to US$ 579.3 of 14.9 per cent in H1:2020-21. The momentum in
billion, covering 18.4 months of imports and 102.8 growth – Q-o-Q-SAAR – eased during Q3 and Q4 from
per cent of external debt (chart III.17). Q2 (Chart III.18).
Chart III.18: GVA Growth
a: GVA Growth b: GVA Growth: excluding PADO
#: Implied
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Table III.7: Sector-wise Growth in GVA
(y-o-y, per cent)
Sector 2019-20 2020-21 Weighted 2019-20 (FRE) 2020-21 (SAE)
(FRE) (SAE) Contribution
2020-21 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 4.3 3.0 0.4 3.3 3.5 3.4 6.8 3.3 3.0 3.9 1.9
Industry -2.0 -7.4 -1.6 1.0 -2.7 -3.0 -3.2 -31.1 -1.6 1.4 1.9
Mining and quarrying -2.5 -9.2 -0.2 -1.3 -5.2 -3.5 -0.9 -18.0 -7.6 -5.9 -5.5
Manufacturing -2.4 -8.4 -1.4 0.6 -3.0 -2.9 -4.2 -35.9 -1.5 1.6 2.3
Electricity, gas, water supply and other utilities 2.1 1.8 0.0 6.9 1.7 -3.1 2.6 -9.9 2.3 7.3 8.9
Services 6.4 -8.4 -5.3 6.8 7.3 5.8 5.6 -24.8 -10.9 0.0 2.9
Construction 1.0 -10.3 -0.8 3.7 1.0 -1.3 0.7 -49.4 -7.2 6.2 8.4
Trade, hotels, transport, communication 6.4 -18.0 -3.7 6.2 6.8 7.0 5.7 -47.6 -15.3 -7.7 -2.9
Financial, real estate and professional services 7.3 -1.4 -0.3 8.8 8.9 5.5 4.9 -5.4 -9.5 6.6 6.9
Public administration, defence and other services 8.3 -4.1 -0.5 5.6 8.8 8.9 9.6 -9.7 -9.3 -1.5 3.2
GVA at basic prices 4.1 -6.5 -6.5 5.0 4.6 3.4 3.7 -22.4 -7.3 1.0 2.5
FRE: First Revised Estimates; SAE: Second Advance Estimates; #: Implicit growth.
Source: NSO.
Agriculture and allied activities remained at a record level of 3,265.8 lakh tonnes during 2020-
resilient during 2020-21, partially offsetting 21 – 1.8 per cent higher than the final estimates for
the contraction in other components of GVA. 2019-20 – driven largely by production of aromatics
Manufacturing activity entered expansion in Q3 but and medicinal crops, vegetables and fruits.
dipped back into contraction in January 2021. The
Allied activities consisting of livestock, forestry and
services sector – battered by the pandemic – tenuously
fishing – which constitute about 44 per cent of the
regained momentum in H2, buoyed by optimism on
the roll-out of vaccines (Table III.7).
Table III.8: Agricultural Production in 2020-21
III.2.1 Agriculture
(Second Advance Estimates)
(in Lakh Tonnes)
GVA in agriculture and allied activities expanded by
3.0 per cent in H2:2020-21, maintaining its pace of Crop 2019-20 2020-21 Variation in 2020-21
(Per cent)
H1. Sufficient access to inputs, adequate and well-
2nd AE Final Target 2nd Over Over Over
spread south-west and the north-east monsoon AE 2nd AE Final Target
2019-20 2019-20
rains, sufficient reservoir levels and improved soil
Foodgrains 2919.5 2975.0 3010.0 3033.4 3.9 2.0 0.8
moisture pushed up rabi acreage by 2.9 per cent. The
Kharif 1423.6 1438.1 1493.5 1479.5 3.9 2.9 -0.9
SAE for 2020-21 has placed kharif and rabi foodgrains
Rabi 1496.0 1536.9 1516.5 1554.0 3.9 1.1 2.5
production higher by 2.9 and 1.1 per cent, respectively, Rice 1174.7 1188.7 1196.0 1203.2 2.4 1.2 0.6
over their levels a year ago (Table III.8). Foodgrains Wheat 1062.1 1078.6 1080.0 1092.4 2.9 1.3 1.1
Pulses 230.2 230.3 256.0 244.2 6.1 6.0 -4.6
production, including both the staple cereals, viz.,
Oilseeds 341.9 332.2 370.0 373.1 9.1 12.3 0.8
rice and wheat, touched another record for the fifth
Sugarcane 3538.5 3705.0 3900.0 3976.6 12.4 7.3 2.0
consecutive year. Among the commercial crops, cotton Cotton # 348.9 360.7 360.0 365.4 4.7 1.3 1.5
Jute & 98.1 98.8 105.0 97.8 -0.3 -1.0 -6.9
and oilseeds (groundnut and ‘rapeseed and mustard’)
Mesta ##
achieved record production levels. All the crops, except
#: lakh bales of 170 kgs. each.
pulses and jute and mesta, achieved their target levels ##: lakh bales of 180 kgs. each.
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Government of
for 2020-21. Horticultural production was also placed India.

Chapter III Demand and Output
over and above the record procurement during the
Chart III.19: Contribution of Crops and
Allied Activities previous rabi season. Record procurement of cereals
led to a significantly higher buffer stock of wheat and
rice at 286.8 lakh tonnes (2.1 times the buffer norms)
and 512.4 lakh tonnes (6.7 times the buffer norms),
respectively, by mid-March 2020 notwithstanding 315
lakh tonnes of cereals distributed under the Pradhan
Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (Chart III.20).
In terms of high frequency indicators, tractor sales
posted strong growth in Q3 and January-February
2021, and two-wheeler sales remained buoyant (Table
III.9). Farm exports remained strong during Q3 and
Q4 (January-February), benefitting from a surge in
global demand and higher international food prices.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
The Union Budget 2021-22 has announced measures
sector – contributed about half of overall agricultural targeted at infrastructure development in agriculture,
GVA growth in 2019-20 (Chart III.19).
rural areas, and fisheries by enhancing credit flow
The procurement of paddy during the kharif and improving supply chains for perishables while
marketing season that started in September 2020 ensuring continuation of direct procurement of
was higher by 14.0 per cent year-on-year till March cereals by the government. The extension of the
31, 2021. For upcoming rabi marketing season (April- agriculture infrastructure fund to Agricultural
March), the government has set a target to procure Produce Market Committees (APMCs) and integration
407.0 lakh tonnes of wheat, which is 2.3 per cent of additional 1,000 APMC mandis with electronic-
Chart III.20: Stock, Procurement and Offtake Position – Wheat and Rice
a: Wheat b: Rice
Source: Food Corporation of India, GoI.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Table III.9: High Frequency Indicators for Rural Economy
Per cent
Items Growth Jul-20 Aug-20 Sep-20 Oct-20 Nov-20 Dec-20 Jan-21 Feb-21
Tractor sales y-o-y 38.5 74.7 28.3 7.7 51.3 43.1 46.7 31.1
Two-wheeler sales y-o-y -15.2 3.0 11.6 16.9 13.4 7.4 6.6 10.2
Fertilizer sales y-o-y 25.4 7.0 -2.6 17.7 3.7 -26.5 -22.3 NA
Demand for employment (MGNREGA) y-o-y 66.3 60.4 63.3 81.0 43.1 47.2 30.0 20.3
Export - agri and allied sector y-o-y 15.3 14.1 31.5 34.2 12.5 12.9 21.5 27.1
Agriculture credit (Outstanding) y-o-y 5.4 4.9 5.9 7.4 8.5 9.4 9.9 10.2
Stocks-cereals (Ratio of actual stock to quarterly buffer norms) Rice 2.8 2.2 2.4 3.3 3.6 4.5 6.6 6.7
Wheat 2.0 1.7 2.1 2.0 1.8 1.7 2.3 2.1
Sources: Tractor Manufactures Association; SIAM; Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilzers; Ministry of Rural Development; CMIE; RBI; and Food
Corporation of India.
National Agriculture Market (e-NAM)4 is expected to The index of industrial production (IIP) emerged out
enhance farmers access to markets and prices and of a prolonged contraction in September 2020 but it
improve marketing efficiency in the agriculture sector. lost momentum again in November and January 2021
The proposal to expand “operation green” from 3 (Chart III.22a). The improvement in manufacturing
(onions, tomatoes and potatoes) to 22 perishable activity in Q3 was driven by basic metals, chemical
commodities is expected to improve supply chains, and chemical products, motor vehicles and electrical
reduce price fluctuations and boost exports of equipment. 12 out of 23 industry groups entered
perishable agricultural commodities. According to the positive territory in Q3 as compared to only 5 groups
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration during Q2. In terms of the use-based classification,
(NOAA) of the US, there is around 60 per cent chance the recovery in Q3 was led by consumer durables
of a transition from La Niña to ENSO-Neutral during and infrastructure/construction goods on the back of
the April-June 2021, indicative of a normal south west
monsoon.
Chart III.21: Weighted Contribution to
Industrial GVA growth
III.2.2 Industry
Industrial sector GVA was driven by the manufacturing
sector emerging out of contraction in Q3, although
in Q4, there has been some setback due to sharp
retrenchment of production of capital goods and
consumer non-durables (Chart III.21). In contrast,
the mining sector continued to languish, throttled
by supply bottlenecks. Crude oil and natural gas
production dropped due to lack of critical infrastructure
and equipment, and operational difficulties amidst
the pandemic. Natural gas production crossed the pre-
COVID levels in January 2021 following the start of
production in KG-D6 field, which bodes well for the
#: Implicit.
outlook. Source: NSO and RBI staff estimates.
4 National Agriculture Market (eNAM) is a pan-India electronic trading portal which networks the APMC mandis to create a unified national market for
agricultural commodities.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.22: Index of Industrial Production (IIP)
a: Exclusion-based IIP b: IIP Index: Seasonally Adjusted and Normailsed
c: Sectoral Contribution to IIP Growth d: Use-based Contribution to IIP Growth
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
increase in sales of automobiles and electronics, and some deceleration in February 2021. The thermal
higher domestic demand from the auto and white sector contributed primarily to the upturn in electricity
goods segment for steel (Chart III.22d). In capital generation in Q3 and January with a growth of 7.6 per
goods sector, the moderation was offset by higher cent and 7.0 per cent, respectively, before easing to 1.9
output of agricultural tractors, harvesters, threshers, per cent in February 2021. The rate of contraction in
nuclear power generation became more pronounced
tyres and tubes.
during January-February 2021, while generation
In January 2021, the IIP contracted by 1.6 per cent,
from renewable sources decelerated in January and
pulled down by the downturn in manufacturing.
contracted in February (Chart III.23a). Hydro power
Mining activity contracted further in January 2021.
generation continued to contract in Q3 and January-
In terms of the use-based classification, capital goods
February 2021. The deceleration in electricity demand
production declined to a 5-month low while consumer in February was mainly due to a drop in consumption
non-durables output fell to an 8-month low. in western and southern regions (Chart III.23b).
Electricity generation improved in Q3 and January Nominal GVA of manufacturing companies posted
2021 reflecting buoyant demand although there was a notable improvement in Q3 on the back of strong

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart III.23: Electricity Demand and Consumption
a: Electricity Generation and Demand Growth b: Electricty Consumption: Region-wise
Source: Central Electricity Authority and Power System Operation Corporation Limited (POSOCO).
growth in profits (Chart III.24). Profit before tax of Business sentiment improved in H2:2020-21, with
manufacturing companies surged on an improvement the Reserve Bank’s business assessment index
in net sales coupled with reduced interest expenses. rising to 113.1 in Q4:20-21 (the 93rd round of the
Employee cost posted an uptick, however. industrial outlook survey) from 108.6 in Q3:2020-21.
The business expectations index (BEI) also improved
Chart III.24: Components of Manufacturing GVA
further to 119.6 for Q1:2021-22 as compared to 114.1
for Q4:2020-21. The manufacturing purchasing
managers’ index (PMI) at 55.4 in March 2021 indicated
expansion for the eighth consecutive month,
driven by upturn in new orders and production
(Chart III.25a).
Overall, manufacturing activity and electricity
generation are gradually normalising and approaching
their 2019-20 levels (Table III.10).
III.2.3 Services
The services sector stepped out of contraction
Note: Data for Q3:2020-21 are based on results of 1,685 listed private
in H2:2020-21 with the phased unlocking of the
manufacturing companies.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
economy, and recorded a growth of 1.4 per cent.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.25: Purchasing Managers Index (PMI)
a: PMI Manufacturing b: PMI Services
Note: >50: Expansion, < 50: Contraction.
Source: IHS Markit.
The construction sector recuperated faster than (Chart III.26a). Indicators such as finished steel
anticipated – entering positive territory in Q3 – consumption mirrored the recovery in construction
and rose by 7.3 per cent in H2 due to demand from activity (Chart III.26b). Robust collection of the goods
the residential sector and highway construction and services tax (GST) and issuances of e-way bills
Table III.10: Industrial Sector Indicators: Progress towards Normalisation
(Seasonally adjusted and normalised to 2019-2020 = 100)
Indicators 2019-20 Q1:2020-21 Q2:2020-21 Q3:2020-21 Oct-20 Nov-20 Dec-20 Jan-21 Feb-21
I Index of Industrial Production 100 69 94 98 98 97 99 98
IIP: Manufacturing 100 64 93 99 99 97 100 97
IIP: Capital goods 100 40 85 95 89 94 94
IIP: Infrastructure & construction goods 100 56 96 102 102 101 102 99
IIP: Consumer durables goods 100 36 89 100 104 95 101 99
IIP: Consumer non-durables goods 100 86 102 101 104 99 100 94
II Eight Core Industries Index 100 79 94 97 95 98 100 100 101
ECI: Steel 100 56 97 101 99 100 103 100 99
ECI: Cement 100 63 87 94 95 94 96 97 103
Electricity demand 100 87 99 101 100 99 103 105 109
III Production of Automobiles
Passenger vehicles 100 19 87 109 112 99 116 94 106
Two wheelers 100 24 91 110 117 105 109 105 109
Three wheelers 100 25 46 64 62 62 68 62 70
Production of tractors 100 60 122 150 144 140 167 173 177
Sources: CMIE, CEIC, NSO, SIAM, RBI staff estimates.
 Below pre-Covid level Normalisation / recovery of activity 

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart III.26: Service Sector
a: Service Sector Components b: Construction Indicators
Sources: NSO; Office of Economic Adviser, Joint Plant Committee, Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, Ministry of Commerce & Industry.
suggest a strong upturn in domestic trading activity. and international, boosted railway freight traffic
The ongoing normalisation of trade, both domestic (Table III.11).
Table III.11: Services Sector: Progress towards Normalisation
(Seasonally adjusted and normalised to 2019-2020 = 100)
Indicators 2019-20 Q1:2020-21 Q2:2020-21 Q3:2020-21 Oct-20 Nov-20 Dec-20 Jan-21 Feb-21
I Construction
Steel consumption 100 50 93 110 103 113 113 110 109
Cement production 100 63 87 94 95 94 96 97 103
II Trade, Hotels, Transport, Communication and
Services related to Broadcasting
Commercial vehicle sales (Quarterly average)* 100 18 74 108
Domestic air passenger traffic 100 7 26 48 42 49 53 56 64
Domestic air cargo 100 27 69 88 85 88 90 89 96
International air cargo 100 46 78 84 84 83 86 86 92
Freight traffic 100 82 101 109 109 109 111 110 113
Port cargo 100 82 92 100 97 101 102 103 105
Toll collection: Volume* 100 101 202 265 252 257 285 307 327
Petroleum consumption 100 76 89 98 98 98 99 100 100
GST E-way bill* 100 49 99 118 122 110 123 120 122
GST revenue* 100 61 88 106 103 103 113 118 111
III Financial, Real Estate & Professional Services *
Credit outstanding 100 104 104 106 105 106 108 108 108
Bank deposits 100 107 110 112 110 111 114 114 114
Life insurance first year premium 100 76 116 102 106 89 113 99 104
Non-life insurance premium 100 89 122 103 101 95 114 117 100
4 External Trade*
Merchandise exports 100 66 95 97 96 90 104 104 106
Merchandise imports 100 52 74 92 85 84 108 106 103
Non-oil non-gold imports 100 60 82 100 97 93 110 102 92
Services exports 100 91 92 95 90 93 102 93
Services imports 100 83 85 89 81 86 98 86
* indicates data has not been seasonally adjusted.
Sources: CMIE, CEIC, NSO, MOSPI, IRDAI, RBI staff estimates.
 Below pre-Covid level Normalisation / recovery of activity 

Chapter III Demand and Output
as travellers are increasingly shedding their
Chart III.27: Nominal Sales Growth: Industrial
and Services Sectors inhibitions. The services PMI exhibited expansion
during H2 and at 55.3 in February, it was above its long
period average on the back of new work and business
activity gaining hold (Chart III.25b).
In H2, public administration, defence and other
services (PADO) expanded marginally from the
contraction in H1, driven by government revenue
expenditure on public administration. Other services
in PADO – private education; health; personal services;
and cultural and recreational activities – continued
to be tepid. Growth in central government revenue
expenditure, excluding interest payments and
Note: Data for Q3:2020-21 are based on results of 1,685 listed private
manufacturing companies and 678 listed private non-financial services subsidies, recovered in Q3 and strengthened further
companies.
Source: RBI staff estimates. in Q4. GVA in financial, real estate and professional
services rebounded and expanded by 6.8 per cent in
IT companies continued to record steady growth H2, reflecting the strong performance of information
(Chart III.27). Growing demand for core transformation technology and financial companies. Accelerated
services5 and strong revenue conversion from earlier growth in aggregate deposits and the improvement
deals, coupled with low travel cost, supported IT in bank credit extended support to financial services
companies during Q3. Sales of non-IT services during H2.
companies remained in contraction zone in Q3, albeit
The real estate sector gained steam from Q3,
with some moderation.
particularly in rural and semi-urban areas and
Commercial vehicle sales – an indicator of affordable segments in urban areas, on the back of
transportation services – posted a sequential lower mortgage rates, favourable pricing and slash in
improvement in Q3:2020-21, with the pace of stamp duty across several states. In residential real
contraction moderating to 1.2 per cent from 20.1 per estate, new launches registered y-o-y growth for the
cent in Q2. Other indicators of transportation services first time in eight quarters during Q3:2020-21 while
– toll collections; rail freight traffic; and cargo handled the inventory overhang moderated to an average of 55
by major ports – displayed expansion. Air passengers months in Q3 from 73 months in Q2 (Chart III.28a).
and cargo traffic – both domestic and international – Growth in the RBI’s all-India housing price index
remained in contractionary zone, despite some pick- remained unchanged in Q3 from the previous quarter
up. Domestic flights are witnessing some momentum (Chart III.28b).
5 Cloud services, analytics and insights, cognitive business operations, internet of things (IoT) and quality engineering and transformation platform services
led growth in the quarter.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart III.28: Housing Sector- Launches, Sales and Prices
a: Housing Activity in India b: Housing Price Index of RBI
Sources: PropTiger and RBI staff estimates.
III.3 Conclusion to enhance India’s manufacturing capabilities and
bolster exports. Despite gaining some traction, the
Economic activity in India is gathering pace on
contact-intensive services sector may take some
improving business sentiment. Rural demand is
time to reach pre-COVID levels. The recent increase
leading the expansion, and there is growing evidence
in COVID infections, if not contained, could push
of catch-up in urban demand. The fiscal stimulus
under AatmaNirbhar 2.0 and 3.0, coupled with back the normalisation process and impede the
increased allocation for capital expenditure under broader revival of economic activity. The sharp rise
the Union Budget 2021-22, should accelerate public in global crude oil and commodity prices and global
investment and crowd in private investment. The financial market volatility impart downside risks to
production-linked incentives scheme is expected the recovery.

IV. Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
During H2:2020-21, domestic financial markets continued to post recovery in market activity amidst easy
liquidity conditions. Nevertheless, concerns about a surge in infections in a few states, global bond sell-off, the
large government borrowing, and uncertainty about the pace and scale of economic recovery kept market sentiments
subdued. The pace of monetary transmission improved while bank credit growth registered an upturn. Going
forward, the RBI’s market operations would ensure ample surplus liquidity in consonance with the accommodative
policy stance to revive growth on a durable basis by mitigating the impact of COVID-19.
Introduction The weighted average call rate (WACR) in the
unsecured overnight money market eased and slipped
In H2:2020-21, global financial markets remained
below the reverse repo rate, beginning the second half
largely buoyant, fuelled by optimism around a
of October 2020 (Chart IV.1). The negative spread of
speedy vaccine-led recovery. Growing inflation
WACR relative to the reverse repo rate averaged 14 bps
concerns over fiscal stimulus amidst extremely
in H2.
accommodative monetary policies rattled global bond
markets in February 2021. Long-term sovereign bond In the overnight call money segment, the weighted
yields jumped sharply in the US and induced bouts average rate (WAR) of traded deals generally remained
of volatility across financial markets and regions of above the reverse repo rate while that of reported deals
the world. The consequent yield curve steepening remained below1. The share of the reported deals in
resulted in portfolio reallocation and corrections
in equity prices. Despite the recent declines, stock
Chart IV.1: Policy Corridor and WACR
indices remain elevated on anticipation of stronger
recovery. In the currency markets, the US dollar
appreciated in the first quarter of 2021 driven by rising
bond yields while EME currencies faced depreciation
pressures from bouts of capital outflows.
IV.1 Domestic Financial Markets
During H2:2020-21, domestic financial markets
continued to post recovery in market activity amidst
easy liquidity conditions. Nevertheless, concerns
about a surge in infections in a few states, global
bond sell-off, the large government borrowing and
uncertainty about the pace and scale of economic
recovery kept market sentiments subdued.
Source: Reserve Bank of India (RBI).
IV.1.1 Money Market
1 ‘Traded deals’ are deals negotiated directly on the NDS-Call platform
The money market remained largely stable during whereas ‘reported deals’ are over-the-counter (OTC) deals which are
reported on the NDS-Call platform after the completion of negotiation of
H2:2020-21, reflecting surplus liquidity conditions. deals.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart IV.2: Share of Traded/Reported Chart IV.3: Share in Overnight
Deals in Call Money Market Money Market Volumes
Sources: Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL); RBI. Sources: CCIL; RBI.
the total volume of the call money segment increased (private sector) banks in both triparty and market repo
to 54 per cent in H2:2020-21 from 46 per cent in H1, segments – the share of public sector banks increased
thereby pulling down the WACR below the reverse from 14 per cent in October 2020 to 56 per cent in
repo rate (Chart IV.2). The increased share of reported March 2021 in the triparty repo and from 10 per cent
deals reflected the sharp increase in lending share of to 17 per cent in market repo segment over the same
co-operative banks from 60 per cent in October to 79 period – as these segments provide access to funds
per cent in November and the concomitant reduction from mutual funds. Moreover, the share of mutual
in the borrowing share of public sector banks (PSBs) funds in triparty repo lending increased from 61 per
from 26 per cent to 1.0 per cent during the same cent in October 2020 to 68 per cent in March 2021.
period.
The rates in the secured overnight segments remained
The share of the collateralised money market (triparty consistently below the WACR and the reverse repo
repo and market repo) in the overnight money market rate (Chart IV.4), impelled by the surplus liquidity
volume increased further to 97 per cent in H2: 2020- conditions, as alluded to earlier.
21 from 95 per cent in H2: 2019-20 (Chart IV.3). Within
Following the reactivation of the 14-day variable
the secured segment, the share of triparty repo in the
rate reverse repo auctions in mid-January 2021 with
overnight money market volume increased due to
the resumption of normal liquidity management
ramped-up lending by mutual funds in this segment.
operations, money market rates and their spreads
The combined volume in the overnight and term
from the WACR firmed up somewhat from end-
segments of the triparty repo market expanded sharply
January 2021 (Table IV.1).
during H2:2020-21 – daily average volume increased
from `1.67 lakh crore in October 2020 to `2.67 lakh Interest rates on longer-term money market
crore in March 2021. There was a sharp increase instruments like 91-day Treasury Bills (T-Bills)
(decrease) in the share of borrowing by public sector rates and the 3-month certificates of deposit (CDs)

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Table IV.1: Policy Transmission in the Money Market
(Basis points)
Change in Rates Average Spread over WACR
Repo Call Triparty Market 3-month 91-day 3-month Triparty Market 3-month 91-day 3-month
(WACR) repo repo CD T-bill CP repo repo CD T-bill CP
H1: 2020-21 -40 -87 265 211 -156 -97 -155 -59 -59 -2 -26 80
(Apr 03 – Sep 30, 2020)
H2: 2020-21 0 -13 14 15 -11 0 -67 -14 -17 5 -2 46
(Oct 01-Mar 31, 2021)
Jan 11*- Mar 31, 2021 0 12 13 18 25 24 22 -7 -17 13 7 65
Note: - (+): easing (hardening).
*: Period after the announcement of resumption of normal liquidity operations by the RBI.
Sources: RBI; CCIL:F-TRAC; CCIL; FBIL; and RBI staff estimates.
to `9.54 lakh crore during H2:2020-21 from `10.04
Chart IV.4: Money Market Rates
lakh crore during the corresponding period of 2019-
20 (Chart IV.5.a). CP rates generally traded above the
reverse repo rate, with an average spread of 33 bps
during H2:2020-21. A temporary rise in the weighted
average discount rate (WADR) was observed in
the last fortnight of January and March 2021 due
to increased issuances by non-banking financial
companies (NBFCs) (Chart IV.5.b).
IV.1.2 Government Securities (G-sec) Market
During H2: 2020-21, the 10-year G-sec yield firmed up
by 30 bps, although it remained at decadal low levels.
During Q3:2020-21, the yield softened by 15 bps
from 6.04 per cent to 5.89 per cent, aided by policy
Sources: RBI; CCIL: F-TRAC; CCIL: FBIL; and RBI staff estimates.
measures viz., (i) introduction of on-tap TLTROs;
(ii) extended dispensation of enhanced held to
rates also traded below the reverse repo rate, on an
average, by 16 bps and 9 bps, respectively. Interest maturity (HTM) limit for banks; (iii) open market
rates on CDs and commercial papers (CPs), however, operation (OMO) purchase auctions; (iv) simultaneous
inched up above the reverse repo rate in March purchase and sale of securities (special OMOs)2 ; and
2021. Reflecting the surplus system liquidity and (iv) the monetary policy committee’s (MPCs) forward
weak credit demand, banks reduced their recourse guidance on maintaining accommodative monetary
to CDs. As a result, fresh issuance of CDs declined policy stance as long as necessary to revive growth
to `53,468 crore during H2:2020-21 (up to March 12, on a durable basis. The extent of softening, however,
2021) from `1.69 lakh crore in the corresponding was limited over concerns about large supply of bonds
period of 2019-20. CP issuances declined moderately with the announcement of additional borrowing of
2 Commonly referred as Operation Twist (OT).

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart IV.5: Primary Issuances of Commercial Paper
a: Systemic Liquidity, Issuances and WADR b: Institutional Break-up
Sources: RBI; CCIL - F-TRAC; and RBI staff estimates.
`1.1 lakh crore by the Central Government to fund Government borrowings of `12.05 lakh crore for
the shortfall in GST compensation for states. 2021-22 and additional borrowing of `80,000 crore
for 2020-21. Yields subsequently eased somewhat
During Q4, yields remained range bound with an
upward bias till the presentation of the Union on the back of (i) the OMO purchases for an
Budget 2021-22 on February 1, 2021 (Chart IV.6). enhanced amount of `20,000 crore on February 10,
Yields spiked following the announcement of 2021 at lower than the market’s expected cut-offs;
Chart IV.6: 10-year Yield, Repo Rate and Liquidity Conditions
Sources: RBI; and Financial Benchmark of India Pvt Ltd. (FBIL).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
(ii) extension of the dispensation of enhanced HTM
Chart IV.7: FBIL -T-Bill Benchmark
limit of 22 per cent of NDTL up to March 31, 2023; and
(Yield to Maturity)
(iii) forward guidance by the RBI on ensuring ample
liquidity to foster congenial financing conditions.
Yields firmed up from the second half of February in
the wake of the sharp rise in US treasury yields and
higher crude oil prices. The cancellation of the last
scheduled G-sec auction for 2020-21 resulted in some
moderation in yields towards end-March.
Yields on treasury bills across maturities traded below
the policy repo rate as systemic liquidity continued to
remain in large surplus (Chart IV.7).
The average level of the yield curve increased by 19
bps in H2:2020-21 and the slope steepened by 5 bps3
(Chart IV.8). The slope dynamics reflect larger rise in
Sources: FBIL.
long term yields compared with the short term, the
latter driven by the large systemic liquidity surplus in
was 53 bps during H2, same as in H1:2020-21
consonance with the accommodative monetary policy
(Chart IV.9). The spread widened post the Union
stance.
Budget announcement of February 1, 2021 but
State Development Loans
narrowed substantially in end-March 2021 following
The weighted average spread of cut-off yields on the cancellation of the last G-sec auction. The average
SDLs over G-sec yields of corresponding maturities inter-state spread on securities of 10-year maturity
Chart IV.8: G-Sec Yield Curve
a: Shifts b: Changes in Level and Slope
Sources: FBIL; and RBI staff estimates.
3 While the level is the average of par yields of all tenors up to 30-years published by FBIL, the slope (term spread) is the difference in par yields of
3-months and 30-years maturities.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
11.31 years as at end-March 2021 from 10.97 years as
Chart IV.9: SDLs - Amount Raised and Spread
over G-sec Yield at end-September 2020. The weighted average coupon
(WAC) at 7.27 per cent was lower than 7.44 per cent
over the same period.
IV.1.3 Corporate Bond Market
During H2:2020-21, corporate bond yields remained
almost unchanged. Yields on AAA-rated 3-year bonds
issued by NBFCs softened by 1 basis point to 5.54
per cent, while those on corporates and public-sector
undertakings (PSUs), financial institutions (FIs) and
banks hardened by 5 bps and 11 bps to 5.40 per cent
and 5.20 per cent, respectively, at end-March 2021
(Chart IV.10a). The risk premium or spread on AAA-
rated 3-year bonds (over 3-year G-sec) moderated
Source: RBI. from 63 bps to 36 bps for NBFCs, 43 bps to 22 bps for
corporates and 17 bps to 2 bps for PSUs, FIs and banks
(fresh issuance) was 11 bps in H2 as compared with 9
(Chart IV.10b).
bps in H1:2020-21.
Resource mobilisation through issuances of corporate
Switching of Securities
bonds in the primary market at `3.06 lakh crore during
In order to facilitate debt consolidation, the Reserve H2:2020-21 (up to February 2021) was marginally
Bank conducted six switch operations on behalf of lower than `3.08 lakh crore during the corresponding
the central government amounting to `77,371 crore period of the previous year (Chart IV.11a). Almost
during H2:2020-21. The weighted average maturity the entire resource mobilisation in the corporate
(WAM) of the outstanding stock of G-secs increased to bond market (97.3 per cent) was through the private
Chart IV.10: Corporate Bond Yields and Spreads on AAA-rated 3-year Bonds
a: Yields b: Spreads
Source: Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.11: Corporate Bond Market Activity
a: Primary Market Issuances b: Secondary Market Turnover - Daily Average
Source: SEBI.
placement route. Outstanding investments by FPIs in corporates fell from 276 bps to 22 bps. The spreads on
corporate bonds declined to `1.3 lakh crore at end- BBB- (BBB minus) bonds – the lowest rated investment
March 2021 from `1.5 lakh crore at end-September grade corporate bonds – also moderated significantly by
2020. Consequently, foreign portfolio invenstors 171 bps over the same period (Table IV.2). The market
(FPIs’) utilisation of the approved limit for investment perception of credit risk has also improved: State
in corporate bonds declined to 23.1 per cent at end- Bank of India’s and ICICI Bank’s 3-year credit default
March 2021 from 33.8 per cent at end-September 2020. swap (CDS) spreads reduced by 11 bps each during
The daily average secondary market trading volume in H2:2020-21.
the corporate bond market declined by 26.4 per cent
IV.1.4 Equity Market
to `6,084 crore during H2:2020-21 (up to February
2021) over the corresponding period of the previous
Domestic equities scaled all-time highs in H2:2020-21
year (Chart IV.11b).
on positive global cues, record FPI inflows, revival in
Between March 26, 2020 and March 31, 2021, the spread economic activity, robust corporate earnings, roll-out
of AAA-rated 3-year bonds (over 3-year G-sec) issued by of COVID-19 vaccine and announcement of a growth-
Table IV.2: Financial Markets - Rates and Spread
Interest Rates (per cent) Spread in bps (over corresponding risk-free rate)
Instrument
As on As on Variation As on As on Variation
March 26, 2020 March 31, 2021 (in bps) March 26, 2020 March 31, 2021
(1) (2) (3) (4 = 3-2) (5) (6) (7 = 6-5)
CP (3-month) 6.74 3.65 -309 170 38 -132
Corporate Bonds
(i) AAA (1-yr) 7.76 4.15 -361 246 29 -217
(ii) AAA (3-yr) 8.47 5.40 -307 276 22 -254
(iii) AAA (5-yr) 7.84 6.14 -170 141 8 -133
(iv) AA (3-yr) 9.15 6.17 -298 344 99 -245
(v) BBB-minus (3-yr) 12.29 10.05 -224 658 487 -171
10-yr G-sec 6.22 6.17 -5 - - -
Sources: CCIL: F-TRAC; FIMMDA; and Bloomberg.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
oriented Union Budget 2021-22. The BSE Sensex and accelerated roll-out of COVID-19 vaccines. The
gained 30.1 per cent in H2:2020-21 to close at 49,509 benchmark index closed above 50000 for the first
on March 31, 2021 (Chart IV.12a). time on February 3, 2021 and scaled an all-time high
of 52154 on February 15, 2021 riding on the budget
The Indian equity market remained upbeat in October
euphoria. Markets, however, declined towards the
2020 following the phased unlocking of the economy,
Q2 corporate earnings and a slew of liquidity and end of the month following a spike in US treasury
regulatory measures by the RBI. Domestic equities, yields, rise in crude oil prices and fresh COVID-19
however, witnessed cautious trading towards the cases in a few Indian states. The equity market
end of the month due to uncertainty surrounding resumed its upward trajectory in early March 2021
the outcome of the US presidential elections. In following robust GST collections, positive GDP data
November, the BSE Sensex gained by 11.4 per cent, for Q3:2020-21 and improvement in manufacturing
supported by FPI inflows, positive developments and services PMI for February 2021. Market
on the vaccine and the Government’s approval of ebullience, however, sobered reflecting inflation
a `1.5 lakh crore production-linked incentive (PLI) worries and a surge in infections in certain states.
scheme for 10 manufacturing sectors. Equity markets During H2, FPIs were net buyers to the tune of `1.98
extended their gains in December 2020 amidst better- lakh crore while MFs were net sellers amounting
than-expected GDP data for Q2:2020-21, expectations to `0.99 lakh crore in the Indian equity market
of swifter global economic recovery after the US
(Chart IV.12b). Resource mobilisation through public
stimulus package and the announcement of Brexit
and rights issues of equity increased to `1.04 lakh
trade deal. Subsequently, the emergence of new
crore during 2020-21 (up to February 2021) from
strains of coronavirus in the UK and several other
`66,324 crore in the corresponding period of the
countries dampened sentiments and capped market
previous year.
rallies. Overall, the BSE Sensex increased by 25.4 per
cent during Q3:2020-21. IV.1.5. Foreign Exchange Market
In January 2021, domestic markets surged on the During H2:2020-21, the Indian rupee (INR) traded
back of upbeat corporate results for Q3:2020-21 mostly with an appreciating bias against the US
Chart IV.12: Stock Market Indices and Investment
a: BSE Sensex and Dow Jones Industrial Average b: Net Investment in Equity by Institutional Investors
Sources: Bloomberg; NSDL; and SEBI.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
2020, the INR appreciated to `72.29 on February
Chart IV.13: Movements of Indian Rupee
and US Dollar Index 24, 2021 owing to sustained strong FPI inflows but
depreciated somewhat thereafter due to elevated
global financial market volatility on the back of rising
US yields, firming global crude prices and moderation
in FPI inflows.
Strong FPI flows to most EMEs, largely driven by ample
global liquidity, have induced an appreciation of their
currencies. The appreciation of INR was modest
relative to its EME peers in H2 (Chart IV.14a). In terms
of the real effective exchange rate (REER), the INR
depreciated between September 2020 and February
2021 in contrast to major EMEs (Chart IV.14b).
In terms of the 40-currency nominal effective exchange
Sources: FBIL; and Thomson Reuters.
rate (NEER), the INR depreciated by 0.2 per cent
dollar on the back of growth revival and robust (at end-March 2021 over the average of September
foreign investments amidst a weakening US dollar 2020), while it depreciated by 1.4 per cent in terms of
(Chart IV.13). After some depreciation in November the 40-currency REER (Table IV.3).
Chart IV.14: Cross-Currency Movements
a: Movement of Major EME Currencies against US Dolla r b: Movement in REE R
(end-March, 2021 over end-September 2020) (February 2021 over September 2020)
Sources: RBI; FBIL; IMF; Bloomberg; Thomson Reuters; and Bank for International Settlements (BIS).

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Financial Barometer
Table IV.3: Nominal and Real Effective
Exchange Rate Indices (Trade-weighted) A cross-market financial barometer illustrates the
(Base: 2015-16 = 100)
recovery in financial markets from the height of
Item Index: Appreciation (+) /
the pandemic-induced disruptions.4 The barometer
end-March 2021 Depreciation (-)
(P) (Per cent) presents four different stages since the declaration of
end-March 2021 over
the pandemic. In response to the gradual unlocking
September (average) 2020
40-currency REER 104.0 -1.4 of the economy and resumption of normal market
40-currency NEER 94.7 -0.2
activity, all nine indicators suggest improvement in
6-currency REER 102.3 -1.2
6-currency NEER 88.5 -0.9 financial market sentiments in March 2021 vis-à-vis
`/US$ 73.5 0.0
the elevated stress levels of March and May 2020
P: Provisional.
(Chart IV.15).
Sources: RBI; and FBIL.
Chart IV.15: Financial Market Barometer
a: 24-Mar-20 b: 8-May-20
28-Oct-20 05-Mar-21
Sources: Bloomberg; CCIL: F-TRAC; FBIL; and RBI staff estimates.
4 The barometer consists of nine indicators across four markets (money, bonds, foreign exchange and equities) and compares the level of each indicator
on a certain day with its pre-turmoil level (calibrated as zero on the scale) and with its level at a ‘peak’ in the turmoil (calibrated as 100). Negative column
for an indicator indicate values lower than its pre-turmoil level. The pre-turmoil level for all indicators is taken as January 1, 2020, while the peak turmoil
day is indicator specific and happens to concentrate around March 24, 2020 (the day of imposition of country-wide lockdown) and in some cases in May
2020 (see Chapter IV of Monetary Policy Report, October 2020).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
IV.1.6 Credit Market
Chart IV.16: Non-food Credit Growth of SCBs
Credit offtake improved in H2, with the momentum
picking up beginning October and registering a
positive growth (financial year basis) since November.
Non-food credit by scheduled commercial banks
(SCBs) rose by 6.4 per cent (y-o-y as on March 12) as
compared with 6.1 per cent a year ago (Chart IV.16).
Credit growth accelerated across all bank groups,
especially public sector banks (PSBs) (Chart IV.17a).
Of the incremental credit extended by SCBs on a
y-o-y basis (March 12, 2021 over March 13, 2020),
53.8 per cent was provided by PSBs, 45.7 per cent by
private sector banks and 0.5 per cent by foreign banks
(Chart IV.17b).
Source: RBI
Among major sectors5, credit to agriculture grew by
10.2 per cent (y-o-y) in February 2021 – the highest
since April 2017 (Chart IV.18a). Credit growth to the taken by the Government of India and the RBI for
services sector also remained strong. Credit to the enhancing credit flows to the MSME sector. In terms
industrial sector, however, contracted marginally by of the contribution of different sectors in incremental
0.2 per cent, mainly due to a decline in credit to large credit, personal loans accounted for the largest share
industries (which account for more than 80 per cent (41.7 per cent), followed by the services sector (39.0
of credit to the industrial sector). On the positive per cent) (Chart IV.18b). In the overall non-food credit
side, credit to medium industries registered a robust growth of February 2021, the relative contributions
growth of 21.0 per cent, reflecting the measures of personal loans and credit to the services sector
Chart IV.17: Credit Flow across Bank-Groups
a: Growth b: Share
Source: RBI
5 Data on sectoral credit relate to select banks accounting for around 90 per cent of the total non-food credit.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart IV.18: Sectoral Deployment of Credit
a: Growth (y-o-y)
b: Share in Incremental Non-food Credit c: Non-food Credit Growth - Contribution of
Major Sub-Sectors
Source: RBI.
were 2.7 percentage points and 2.5 percentage points, to February 2021) mainly due to robust credit offtake in
respectively (Chart IV.18c). transport operators and trade segments (Chart IV.19a).
Within industry, credit to mining and quarrying, On a financial year basis (up to February 2021), credit
food processing, beverages and tobacco, textile, gems growth to the services sector accelerated at a modest
and jewellery, vehicle, vehicle parts and transport pace (Chart IV.19b). Personal loans segment, which has
equipment registered accelerated growth (on a y-o-y generally performed well in recent years, decelerated
basis) in February 2021. Credit growth to petroleum, during H2 so far primarily due to a sharp slowdown in
growth of housing loans, its largest component (Chart
coal products and nuclear fuels and cement and
IV.19c). Amongst other constituents of personal loans,
cement products, however, decelerated, while that
consumer durable loans and credit card outstanding
to chemicals and chemical products, basic metal
witnessed tepid growth while loans against gold and
and metal products, construction, all engineering
jewellery picked up significantly (Chart IV.19d).
and infrastructure contracted. Unlike the sharp
deceleration in credit to the industrial sector, that to The asset quality of SCBs improved during 2020-21 (up
the services sector accelerated during H2:2020-21 (up to December), with the overall non-performing assets

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
v
Chart IV.19: Credit Growth in Select Sub-Sectors
Services
a: Outstanding (Y-o-Y) b: Financial Year
(February over March)
Personal Loans
c: Outstanding (Y-o-Y) d: Financial Year
(February over March)
Source: RBI
(NPA) ratio declining to 6.8 per cent in December COVID-19 pandemic (Chart IV.20a). The NPA ratios
from 8.3 per cent in March 2020, reflecting mainly eased across all the major sectors over the same period
the regulatory dispensations in response to the (Chart IV.20b).
Chart IV.20: Stressed Assets and Non-Performing Assets of SCBs
a: Overall Loan Portfolio of SCBs b: Sectoral Non-Performing Assets
Source: RBI.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart IV.21: Non-SLR Investment and Adjusted Non-Food Credit
a: Non-SLR Investment b: Adjusted Non-Food Credit
Source: RBI.
Banks’ non-SLR investments, i.e., investments in CPs, of normalcy in financial markets; however, it remained
bonds, debentures and shares of public and private elevated for private sector banks (Chart IV.23).
corporates fell in H2:2020-21 (up to March 12) (Chart
Spreads of WALRs on outstanding rupee loans and
IV.21a). Adjusted non-food credit growth (i.e., non-
fresh rupee loans over 1-year MCLR were the lowest
food credit including non-SLR investments) increased
in respect of housing loans, reflecting lower defaults
to 6.0 per cent as on March 12, 2021 from 5.5 per cent
and the availability of collateral (Chart IV.24). Other
a year ago (Chart IV.21b).
personal loans i.e. loans other than housing, vehicle
With muted credit offtake, strong deposit growth and education loans are mostly unsecured and involve
and increased government market borrowings,
banks augmented their SLR investments. Excess SLR
Chart IV.22: Excess SLR of Banks
holdings increased to 11.4 per cent of net demand and
time liabilities (NDTL) on February 26, 2021 from 8.2
per cent at end-March 2020 (Chart IV.22).
IV.2 Monetary Policy Transmission
Monetary transmission to deposit and lending rates
of banks improved significantly during 2020-21, aided
by large surplus liquidity, the implementation of
the external benchmark system and subdued credit
demand. The weighted average lending rate (WALR)
on fresh rupee loans declined by 107 bps since March
2020 in response to the reduction of 115 bps in the
policy repo rate (Table IV.4).
The median spread charged by public sector banks
Source: RBI.
returned to pre-COVID levels with the gradual return

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Table IV.4: Transmission from the Repo Rate to Chart IV.23: Median Spread - WALR
Banks’ Deposit and Lending Rates (Fresh loans) over 1-Year MCLR
(Basis points)
Period Repo Term Deposit Lending Rates
Rate Rates
Median WADTDR 1 - Year WALR - WALR
Term Median Outstand- - Fresh
Deposit MCLR ing Rupee Rupee
Rate Loans Loans
February - -110 -9 -7 -30 2 -40
September

(Pre-external
benchmark)
October -140 -175 -145 -120 -100 -138
2019 - March
2021*
(Post-external
benchmark)
March 2020 - -115 -144 -106 -95 -82 -107 Note: PSB: Public sector banks; PVT: Private sector banks.
March 2021* Source: RBI.
February -250 -205 -152 -150 -98 -178
2019 -
higher credit risk and hence, the spread was the
March 2021*
highest for this category. The lower WALRs on rupee
October 2020 0 -6 -28 -13 -30 -10
-March 2021* export credit reflected the interest rate subvention
*: Latest data on WADTDR and WALRs pertain to February 2021. provided by the government.
WADTDR: Weighted Average Domestic Term Deposit Rate.
MCLR: Marginal Cost of Funds-based Lending Rate. There has been a significant improvement in
WALR: Weighted Average Lending Rate.
Source: RBI. transmission to all new loans sanctioned since
Chart IV.24: Sector-wise WALR Relative to 1-Year Median MCLR (February 2021)#
#Pertain to domestic banks.
Source: RBI.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
October 2019 in respect of the retail and MSE sectors
Table IV.5: Loans linked to External Benchmark –
where the new floating rate loans were mandatorily
Median Spread over Policy Repo Rate
linked to one of the prescribed external benchmarks.6 (February 2021)
(Percentage points)
The quantum of decline in WALRs on MSME loans,
Personal Loans MSME
housing loans, vehicle loans and other personal
Loans
Housing Vehicle Education Other
loans exceeded the decline in WALR on aggregate
Personal
fresh rupee loans to all sectors (138 bps) during the Loans
same period (Chart IV.25). Notably, the introduction Public Sector Banks (12) 3.6 4.8 4.5 6.8 6.1
Private Sector Banks (20) 6.7 7.2 7.4 7.8 7.0
of external benchmark linked loans has incentivised
Domestic Banks (32) 4.4 5.0 4.8 7.0 6.5
banks to adjust their term as well as saving deposit
Note: Figures in parentheses are number of banks.
rates in line with the benchmark rates to protect Source: RBI.
their net interest margins (NIMs), thus accelerating spread charged by public sector banks for different
the pace of transmission to lending rates by bringing categories of loans was lower than those of private
down the overall MCLR and, in turn, lending rates on
sector banks.
other sectors as well.7
The responsiveness of term deposit rates to policy rate
In respect of fresh rupee loans linked to the policy
changes has also improved in the past year, reflecting
repo rate, the median spread charged by domestic
the combined impact of surplus liquidity, the external
banks was the highest in the case of other personal
benchmark-based pricing of loans and weak credit
loans, which are mostly unsecured as indicated earlier
demand. The weighted average domestic term deposit
(Table IV.5). Among the bank groups, the median
rate (WADTDR) on outstanding rupee deposits
declined by 152 bps during the ongoing easing cycle
Chart IV.25: WALR on Personal Loans and (i.e., since February 2019), of which the decline of
Loans to MSMEs - Variation 106 bps has occurred since March 2020. The median
(October 2019 - February 2021)
term deposit rate, which reflects the prevailing card
rates, has registered a sizeable decline of 144 bps since
March 2020 (Chart IV.26).
Apart from the reduction in term deposit rates, banks
have also lowered their saving deposit rates. These
deposit rates of five major banks, which ranged 3.50-
4.00 per cent at the beginning of the current easing
cycle (early February 2019) and 3.25-3.50 per cent
immediately prior to the introduction of the external
benchmark were placed at 2.70-3.00 per cent in March
2021. This adjustment in saving deposit rates is critical
for transmission, given their large share (33.0 per cent
Source: RBI.
as on March 12, 2021) in aggregate deposits.
6 Loans to medium enterprises were also mandatorily linked to the external benchmark, effective April 1, 2020.
7 The reduction in term deposit rates applies only to fresh term deposits, while it is across the board in the case of saving deposits. The latter brings about
an instantaneous reduction in the banks’ cost of funds, and in turn, in the MCLR and the lending rates on fresh rupee loans (provided the spread over
the MCLR remains relatively stable).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.26: Median Term Deposit Rate Chart IV.27: Transmission across Bank Groups
and Liquidity Conditions during Easing Cycle
(February 2019 - February 2021)
Source: RBI. Source: RBI.
Amongst bank groups, the pass-through to deposit have a sizeable bearing on monetary transmission –
and lending rates was the highest for foreign banks are linked to market yields on G-secs with a lag and
(Chart IV.27). The deposit base of foreign banks is are fixed on a quarterly basis at a spread of 0-100 bps
primarily made up of low cost and lower duration
over and above G-sec yields of comparable maturities.
wholesale deposits which adjust quickly to policy rate
The interest rates on the various small savings
changes, prompting faster transmission to lending
instruments, after being lowered sharply during
rates as well.8
Q1:2020-21 in alignment with the formula-based rates,
While the decline in WADTDR on outstanding rupee were left unchanged during the remaining quarters of
term deposits of private sector banks (170 bps) 2020-21 and Q1: 2021-22. The interest rates on small
exceeded that of public sector banks (124 bps) in the
savings for various instruments are 69-198 bps higher
current easing cycle, the reduction in lending rates
than the formula-based rates (Table IV.6).
was higher for the latter group. Historically, WADTDR
of private sector banks has been higher than those IV.3 Liquidity Conditions and the Operating
offered by public sector banks. As credit demand Procedure of Monetary Policy
slowed post COVID-19, private sector banks reduced
The RBI Act 1934 requires the RBI to place the
their term deposit rates sharply, and their WADTDR
operating procedure relating to the implementation
fell below the level of public sector banks (Chart IV.28).
of monetary policy and changes thereto from time
Administered interest rates on small savings to time, if any, in the public domain. In consonance
instruments – which compete with bank deposits and with the accommodative stance of monetary policy,
8 More than 80 per cent of fresh deposits of 8 major foreign banks raised in February 2021 – accounting for 85 per cent of outstanding deposits of foreign
banks - were wholesale deposits and almost 95 per cent of these deposits were of duration up to 180 days. The median term deposit rate (maturity up to
1 year) of foreign banks declined from 4.89 per cent in March 2020 to 2.79 per cent in February 2021.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart IV.28: Weighted Average Domestic Term Deposit Rates (WADTDR) and Deposit Growth
a: WADTDR on Outstanding Rupee Term Deposits b: Growth in Outstanding Term Deposits
PSB: Public sector banks; PVT: Private sector banks.
Source: RBI.
liquidity measures during H2:2020-21 aimed at reiterating the availability of ample liquidity in
reinforcing easy financial conditions to support the system. Overall, the total liquidity support
the nascent economic recovery. Normal liquidity announced by the Reserve Bank since February 6,
management operations – suspended in April 2020 2020 (up to March 31, 2021) amounted to `13.6 lakh
in the face of COVID-related dislocations – were crore [6.7 (6.9) per cent of 2019-20 (2020-21) nominal
resumed in January 2021 with the Reserve Bank GDP] (Table IV.7).
Table IV.6: Interest Rates on Small Savings Instruments – Q1:2021-22
Small Savings Scheme Maturity Spread Average G-sec Formula based Government Difference
(years) (Percentage Yield (%) of Rate of Interest Announced Rate (basis points)
point) $ Corresponding (%) (applicable of Interest (%) in
Maturity for Q1:2021-22) Q1:2021-22
(December 2020
-February 2021)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (3) + (4) (6) (7) = (6) - (5)
Savings Deposit - - - - 4.00 -
Public Provident Fund 15 0.25 6.16 6.41 7.10 69
Term Deposits
1 Year 1 0 3.52 3.52 5.50 198
2 Year 2 0 4.02 4.02 5.50 148
3 Year 3 0 4.51 4.51 5.50 99
5 Year 5 0.25 5.51 5.76 6.70 94
Recurring Deposit Account 5 0 4.51 4.51 5.80 129
Monthly Income Scheme 5 0.25 5.49 5.74 6.60 86
Kisan Vikas Patra 124 Months# 0 6.16 6.16 6.90 74
NSC VIII issue 5 0.25 5.63 5.88 6.80 92
Senior Citizens Saving Scheme 5 1.00 5.51 6.51 7.40 89
Sukanya Samriddhi Account Scheme 21 0.75 6.16 6.91 7.60 69
$: Spreads for fixing small saving rates as per Government of India Press Release of February 2016.
#: Current maturity is 124 months.
Note: Compounding frequency varies across instruments.
Sources: Government of India; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
(`0.89 lakh crore), including three OMOs in state
Table IV.7: Liquidity Measures since February 6, 2020
(As on March 31, 2021) development loans (SDLs)9. Government spending
(` crore) and the drawdown of excess cash reserve ratio (CRR)
Measures Announced
balances by banks also augmented system liquidity
Amount
(Chart IV.29a). Consequently, the surplus liquidity –
LTRO 2,00,000
Variable rate repo 2,25,000 as reflected in average daily net absorptions under
SLF for PDs 7,200
the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) – soared to
CRR cut 1,37,000
MSF (dip by 1% in SLR) 1,37,000 `5.33 lakh crore during the quarter. Banks returned
TLTRO 1,00,000
TLTRO funds amounting to `0.37 lakh crore – 33.1 per
TLTRO (2.0) 50,000
Net OMO purchases 1,50,000 cent of the total amount of `1.13 lakh crore availed
Special liquidity facility for mutual funds 50,000 under the scheme. In Q4, surplus liquidity increased
Refinance to NABARD, SIDBI, NHB and EXIM Bank 75,000
further to `5.9 lakh crore due to injection from forex
Special liquidity scheme for NBFCs 30,000
56-day term repo 1,00,000 operations and net OMO purchases, despite leakage
On Tap TLTRO 1,00,000
through CiC and reduced government spending. Total
Total 13,61,200
OMO purchases during 2020-21 amounted to `3.13
As proportion of 2019-20 GDP (%) 6.7
lakh crore. Reserve money (RM) increased by 14.2 per
As proportion of 2020-21 GDP (%) 6.9
Source: RBI. cent (y-o-y) during 2020-21 (up to March 26) driven by
currency demand while money supply (M3) increased
Drivers and Management of Liquidity
by 12.6 per cent (y-o-y) (up to March 12).
During Q3, the festival related expansion in
currency in circulation (CiC) was the major source The surplus liquidity was mopped up through the
of leakage of liquidity (`0.95 lakh crore), which was overnight fixed rate reverse repo under the LAF and
more than offset by the infusion through net forex the reactivated 14-day variable rate reverse repos
operations (`2.0 lakh crore) and OMO purchases (VRRR) (Chart IV.29b).
Chart IV.29: Systemic Liquidity – Drivers and Management
a: Drivers b: Management
Source: RBI.
9 The Reserve Bank also conducted six auctions of simultaneous purchase and sale of securities under open market operations (special OMOs) during
this period.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Five 14-day VRRR auctions of `2 lakh crore each were
Chart IV.30: Reverse Repo and Forex Purchases
conducted in Q4, which were well received as reflected
in the bid-cover ratio (bidding offers as a proportion of
Resumption of variable
the notified amount) of 1.3 or more in each auction. rate reverse repo
The liquidity absorbed through the fixed rate reverse
repo has steadily increased from a fortnightly average
of `4.3 lakh crore during January 16-29, 2021 to `4.9
lakh crore during January 30 - March 31 (Chart IV.30).
OMOs – both purchases and sales – are a key instrument
to adjust the durable liquidity in the banking system
in sync with the monetary policy stance. During 2020-
21, `1.00 lakh crore was infused through outright
purchases from eight auction announcements
(including three of state development loans). These
announcements contributed to softening of yields Note: Net forex purchases are cumulative from October 2020.
Source: RBI.
(Box IV.1).
Box IV.1: Announcement Effect of Open Market Operations on Financial Markets
OMO auctions conducted by the central bank not only average, of (i) 2 bps on G-sec and corporate bonds; and
impact government bond yields but also have a significant (ii) 1 bps on OIS, validating the presence of announcement
effect on other financial instruments, given that these are effects (Table IV.1.1)12.
priced off risk-free government bonds. The instantaneous
The instantaneous announcement impact is
announcement effect of OMOs is examined for the
corroborated by regression analysis of the events (OMO
benchmark 10-year government securities, AAA 5-year
announcements) with appropriate controls viz., for intra-
corporate bonds (CBs) and 5-year overnight index swaps
day global factors through the global economic policy
(OIS)10 using daily data on secondary market yields/
uncertainty index [GEPUI]13, the inter-day difference in
rates spanning 10 years (January 2012 – January 2021)
yields/rates on the announcement day as an indicator of
in an event study (ES) framework (Hartley and Rebucci,
2020). During the sample period, there were 98 OMO
Table IV.1.1: Closing and Opening Yields/Rates –
announcements – 83 purchases and 15 sales. These Paired t-test
announcements were made after the closure of market
Variable Window Mean t-stat. p-value
trading hours; therefore, the difference in yields between
10-Yr G-Sec Open (+1) - Close (0) -0.02** -2.39 0.01
the opening rate of the next trading day and the closing
5-Yr CBs Close (+1) - Close (0) -0.02** -2.02 0.02
rate of the OMO announcement day, controlled for other
5-Yr OIS Open (+1) - Close (0) -0.01** -2.35 0.01
factors, captures the announcement effect.
Note: Close (0): Announcement day closing; Open (+1): Next day opening;
Results from paired t-tests11 suggest negative and Close (+1): Next day closing.
statistically significant softening in yields/rates, on an ** represents significance at 5 per cent.
(contd.)
10 In OIS transactions, one of the counterparties swaps an overnight interest rate while the other swaps a fixed short-term rate. The spread between these
two rates is an important indicator of financial market conditions – widening spreads signifying tight liquidity conditions.
11 The paired sample t-test determines whether the mean difference between two sets of observations in a large sample is zero.
12 Similar tests for OMO sales announcements suggest that there is no statistically significant difference in yields; hence the empirical exercise is
confined to OMO purchases.
13 Baker, S. R. Bloom, N. and S. J. Davis (2016): Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 131:4, pp. 1593-1636.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Table IV.1.2: Announcement Effect of OMOs
Reg-1 Reg-2 Reg-3
G-sec CBs OIS G-sec CBs OIS G-sec CBs OIS
Dependent Variable
Independent Variables ΔY ΔY ΔY ΔY ΔY ΔY ΔY ΔY ΔY
(open(+1)-close(0)) (close(+1)-close(0)) (open(+1)-close(0)) (open(+1)-close(0)) (close(+1)-close(0)) (open(+1)-close(0)) (open(+1)-close(0)) (close(+1)-close(0)) (open(+1)-close(0))
Constant (C) -0.03*** -0.03*** -0.02*** - - - - - -
ΔY
(close (0)-open (0))
0.72*** - 0.06 0.73*** - 0.09 0.74*** - 0.09
ΔY
(close (0)-close(-1))
- 0.25 - - 0.25 - - 0.24 -
ΔLiquidity
(close (+1)-close (0))
- -0.06 - - -0.05 - - -0.05 -
GEPUI 0.0002*** 0.0001** 0.0001** 0.0001** 0.0001* 0.00005** 0.0002*** 0.0001 0.0000**
Amount - - - -0.18*** -0.14* -0.10** -0.33*** -0.25** -0.11**
Amount x Liquidity - - - - - - -0.07* -0.06** -0.001
Diagnostic (p - value)
B-G LM Test 0.456 0.064 0.209 0.458 0.139 0.112 0.578 0.098 0.117
Arch-LM Test 0.856 0.099 0.839 0.933 0.135 0.946 0.953 0.151 0.947
Note: close (0): Announcement day closing; open (+1): Next day opening; close (+1): Next day closing; close(-1): Previous day closing;
***, ** and * represent significance at 1 per cent, 5 per cent and 10 per cent, respectively.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
the hysteresis phenomenon14 and changes in liquidity only in the G-sec segment, increased global uncertainty
to account for intra-day liquidity effects on corporate marginally hardens yields/rates across markets
bonds in the baseline regression (Reg-1). Apart from (statistically significant). Every `10,000 crore of OMO
these variables, the size of the OMO auction is included auction announcement (equivalent to 0.1 per cent of
in the second regression (Reg-2). Finally, for identifying NDTL, on an average) eases yields/rates by 1-2 bps (Reg-2).
the impact of the prevailing liquidity conditions on the The interaction term in Reg-3 is found to be statistically
announcement effect, an interaction term between significant in the G-sec and corporate bond segment,
the size of the OMO purchase announcement and the suggesting that the prevailing liquidity situation also
liquidity conditions on the announcement day is also matters – thus, the announcement effect is expected
included in the third regression (Reg-3).15 The impact to be larger in deficit liquidity conditions. Overall, the
of the OMO announcement is captured by the constant analysis indicates that the OMO announcements during
term (C) in Reg-1 and by the coefficients on OMO auction 2020-21 have cumulatively eased G-sec and corporate
amounts (as percentage of NDTL) in Reg-2 and Reg-3. All bond yields by about 20-25 bps each and the OIS rates
the control variables are demeaned (by taking deviation by around 10 bps. Special OMOs (OTs), LTRO and TLTRO
from the mean). auctions also had a significant impact on G-sec yields,
thereby moderating the term spread (Talwar et. al, 2021).
ΔY= C + α (ΔY ) + α Δ Liquidity + α GEPUI+
0 -1 1 2
α Amount + α (Amt * Liquidity) +ε ...(1) References:
3 4
Reg-1: α and α = 0 Hartley, J. S. and A. Rebucci (2020), “An Event Study of
3, 4
Reg-2: C and α = 0 COVID-19 Central Bank Quantitative Easing in Advanced

Reg-3: C = 0 and Emerging Economies”, NBER Working Paper No.
27339, June.
The estimates of Reg-1 indicate that, on an average,
the OMO announcements soften G-sec, corporate bond Talwar, B. A., Kushawaha, K.M., and I. Bhattacharyya
yields and OIS rates by 2-3 basis points (bps) each (Table (2021), “Unconventional Monetary Policy in Times of
IV.I.2). While the hysteresis phenomenon is significant COVID-19”, RBI Bulletin, March, pp 41-56.
14 For corporate bonds, the daily difference in yields is used to capture the hysteresis effect.
15 Both the announced amount and the liquidity position (net LAF) are normalised by NDTL.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Policy Measures asymmetric OT having a liquidity impact (purchase
`20,000 crore; sales `15,000 crore) was conducted on
To nurture the revival of activity in sectors that
March 10, 2021 which elicited favourable response on
have multiplier effects on growth, the Reserve
the purchase leg with bid-cover ratio of 4.
Bank announced “On-tap targeted long-term repo
operations (TLTRO)” with tenors of up to three years As staff and IT resources were severely affected in
for a total amount of up to `1 lakh crore at a floating financial markets with the onset of the COVID-19
rate linked to the policy repo rate in October 2020. pandemic, the RBI shortened trading hours for
The liquidity availed by banks under the scheme is various markets regulated by it effective April 7,
to be deployed in corporate bonds, commercial paper 2020. Subsequently, with the phased roll-back of the
and non-convertible debentures issued by the entities lockdown and easing of restrictions on movement
in five sectors16 over and above their investments of people and resumption of normal functioning of
in these instruments as on September 30, 2020. offices, the RBI decided to restore trading hours in a
Moreover, to enable banks to exploit the synergies phased manner beginning November 9, 2020.
between central bank liquidity under on-tap TLTRO
To meet any additional / unforeseen demand for
scheme and the Emergency Credit Line Guarantee
liquidity and to provide flexibility to the banking
Scheme 2.0 (ECLGS 2.0) of the Central Government,
system in year-end liquidity management, the
the Reserve Bank expanded the scope of the on-tap
Reserve Bank decided to conduct two fine-tuning
TLTRO in December to all stressed sectors identified variable rate repo auctions of ` 0.25 lakh crore each
by the Kamath Committee in addition to the five on March 26 and March 31, 2021 of 11 days and 5 days
sectors announced earlier in October 2020. tenor, respectively. Furthermore, it was decided not
to conduct the 14-day VRRR auction on March 26 to
In February 2021, the RBI (i) allowed lending by
ensure the availability of ample liquidity for managing
banks to NBFCs under the TLTRO on-tap scheme for
year-end requirements.
incremental lending to specified stressed sectors; (ii)
announced a gradual restoration of the cash reserve IV.4 Conclusion
ratio (CRR) in two phases in a non-disruptive manner
During H2, domestic financial markets and conditions
to 3.5 per cent of NDTL effective March 27, 2021 and
remained congenial, supported by ample surplus
4.0 per cent effective May 22, 2021; (iii) extended
liquidity. Market activity continued to revive, building
the facility for availing funds under the marginal
on the recovery witnessed in the later part of H1 and
standing facility (MSF) by dipping into the SLR up to
steered by the forward guidance provided on liquidity
3.0 per cent of NDTL until September 30, 2021; and
and the orderly evolution of the yield curve. The pace
(iv) provided CRR exemption for credit flows to new
of monetary transmission improved further and bank
MSME borrowers on exposures up to `25 lakh per
credit growth registered an upturn. Going forward, the
borrower for credit extended up to October 1, 2021.
RBI’s market operations would ensure ample surplus
During H2:2020-21, thirteen auctions of OTs have been liquidity in consonance with the accommodative
conducted. In March, the scale of OTs was increased policy stance to revive growth on a durable basis and
to `15,000 crore (on March 4) and subsequently an mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the economy.
16 Agriculture, agri-infrastructure, secured retail, micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), and drugs, pharmaceuticals and healthcare.

V. External Environment
In Q1:2021 (January-March), the global economy gradually regained momentum. Rapid mutations of the virus,
concerns over the effectiveness of available vaccines and limited access to vaccines in many countries keep the near-
term outlook clouded and the recovery remains fragile, incomplete, uneven and divergent. Inflation risks are widely
perceived to be rising in an environment of exceptional monetary and fiscal accommodation, leading to turbulence
in global financial markets and capital outflows from emerging markets in the second half of Q1:2021.
In Q1:2021 (January-March), the global economy exceptional monetary and fiscal accommodation,
gradually regained momentum of recovery gathered leading to turbulence in global financial markets and
in Q3:2020, which had encountered headwinds in capital outflows from emerging markets in the second
Q4 as many advanced economies (AEs) and some half of Q1:2021.
emerging market economies (EMEs) had to reimpose
V.1 Global Economic Conditions
restrictions/lockdowns in the wake of second/third
Economic activity across major AEs and EMEs posted
wave of infections coupled with the newer and
a strong recovery in Q3:2020, following a record
more virulent strains of the virus. Mass vaccination
plunge in Q2 amidst widespread lockdowns. As stated
drives are underway in several countries, but rapid
earlier, activity stalled again in Q4 as countries battled
mutations of the virus, concerns over the effectiveness
new waves of infections and speedily communicable
of available vaccines and limited access to vaccines in
mutations of the virus. With inoculations underway,
many countries keep the near-term outlook clouded
high frequency indicators, however, point to some pick-
and the recovery remains fragile, incomplete, uneven
and divergent. up in Q1:2021. Nonetheless, activity remains below
the pre-pandemic levels even as GDP contractions
Prolonged monetary accommodation, easy financial
ease across major economies.
conditions and rounds of fiscal stimulus buoyed stock
markets around the world, with strong rallies pushing The US economy contracted by 3.5 per cent in 2020,
equity valuations to record levels in February 2021 to marking an abrupt halt to its expansion for more than
a point of disconnect with the real economy. In the a decade (Table V.1). Notwithstanding steady decline
bond market, short term yields remain anchored on in the unemployment rate from a record level of
low policy rates, but longer-term yields have surged April 2020, labour market conditions remain weak
since the second half of February 2021 across the world and fragile with employment well below the Federal
on rising inflation expectations and apprehensions Reserve's (Fed's) goal of full employment. Incoming
about possible reversal of monetary policy stances. In data for Q1:2021 suggest some stabilisation – retail
turn, equity and currency markets have experienced sales picked up sharply in January before moderating
bouts of volatility. Commodity prices continue to in February on severe winter weather, and the Institute
spiral up under a combination of supply disruptions for Supply Management (ISM)’s manufacturing
and revival of demand, translating into intensifying purchasing managers' index (PMI) in March posted
input price pressures on account of severely stretched its strongest expansion since December 1983. US$1.9
supply chains. Consequently, inflation risks are trillion fiscal stimulus by the new administration has
widely perceived to be rising in an environment of boosted prospects for the US economy.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
consecutive month of decline in the composite PMI
Table V.1: Real GDP Growth
in February owing to subdued service sector activity.
(Per cent)
Country Q1- Q2- Q3- Q4- 2020 2021 2022 The Japanese economy expanded by 11.7 per cent
2020 2020 2020 2020 (E) (P) (P)
(q-o-q, SAAR) in Q4, extending the third quarter’s
Quarter-over-quarter, seasonally adjusted annualised rate (Q-o-q, SAAR) recovery from the worst recession witnessed in
Canada -7.5 -38.5 40.6 9.6 - - - the first half of 2020. Resilient trade conditions
Euro area -14.2 -38.8 59.9 -2.6 - - - as reflected in a strong pick-up in exports and
Japan -2.2 -29.3 22.8 11.7 - - -
high capital spending underpinned by significant
South Korea -5.0 -12.0 8.8 5.0 - - -
government support led to the GDP expansion. With
UK -10.9 -57.9 87.1 5.2 - - -
US -5.0 -31.4 33.4 4.3 - - - the third wave of COVID-19 infections and the re-
imposition of the state of emergency in the Tokyo
Year-on-year (Y-o-y)
area, however, the momentum for recovery slowed
Advanced Economies
down in Q1, accompanied by large contractions in
Canada -0.3 -12.7 -5.3 -3.2 -5.4 3.6 4.1
retail sales and industrial production in January
Euro area -3.3 -14.6 -4.2 -4.9 -6.6 4.2 3.6
Japan -2.0 -10.3 -5.8 -1.4 -4.8 3.1 2.4 and February. The manufacturing PMI, on the other
South Korea 1.4 -2.7 -1.1 -1.2 -1.0 3.1 2.9 hand, expanded in February 2021 for the first time
UK -2.2 -21.4 -8.5 -7.3 -9.8 4.5 5.0
since April 2019, with March witnessing further
US 0.3 -9.0 -2.8 -2.4 -3.5 5.1 2.5
expansion.
Emerging Market Economies
In the UK, GDP expanded in Q4, but it moderated
Brazil -0.3 -10.9 -3.9 -1.1 -4.1 3.6 2.6
from the record pace registered in Q3, leading to an
China -6.8 3.2 4.9 6.5 2.3 8.1 5.6
India 3.0 -24.4 -7.3 0.4 -8.0 11.5 6.8 overall contraction of 9.8 per cent in 2020. In early
Indonesia 3.0 -5.3 -3.5 -2.2 -2.1 4.8 6.0 Q1:2021, infections reached new peaks, with newer
Philippines -0.7 -16.9 -11.4 -8.3 -9.5 6.6 6.5
and more contagious variants pushing the economy
Russia 1.4 -7.8 -3.5 -1.8 -3.0 3.0 3.9
into its third nationwide lockdown in January.
South Africa 0.4 -17.8 -6.2 -4.1 -7.0 2.8 1.4
Thailand -2.1 -12.1 -6.4 -4.2 -6.1 2.7 4.6 Furthermore, the new trading arrangement with the
European Union (EU) post-Brexit is likely to weigh on
Memo: 2020 (E) 2021 (P) 2022 (P)
activity in early 2021.
World -3.5 5.5 4.2
Output
The economic recovery continued in China for the
World Trade -9.6 8.1 6.3
Volume third consecutive quarter in Q4, resulting in an
overall annual increase of 2.3 per cent in 2020 and
E: Estimate. P: Projection. -: Not applicable.
Note: India's data correspond to fiscal year (April-March). making it the only major economy to register growth
Sources: Bloomberg; Official statistical agency of each country and IMF
WEO Update, January 2021. in a pandemic-ravaged year (Table V.2). China’s growth
has been powered by strong and robust recovery in
Euro area GDP declined by 6.6 per cent in 2020, with
manufacturing and exports underpinned by policy
Q4 reading reversing the strong rebound witnessed
support measures. By contrast, the recovery in
in Q3 as emergence of the second wave of the virus
consumption activity remains relatively weak. The
along with more virulent strains led to a re-clamping
Chinese economy seems to have lost some steam
of lockdowns across major constituent economies.
in Q1 from COVID-19 flare-ups in January and
This weakness continued into Q1:2021 with most the associated containment measures. The Caixin
economies extending lockdown restrictions even as composite PMI – though in expansion – eased
they continued with the slow pace of vaccination. to a ten-month low in February. Even the Caixin
Consumer and business sentiments remain weak, manufacturing PMI for March turned out to be the
with declining retail sales in January and the fourth lowest in the current 11-month period of expansion.

Chapter V External Environment
Table V.2: Select Macroeconomic Indicators for BRICS
Country 2020 (E) 2021 (P) Country 2020 (P) 2021 (P)
Real GDP growth rate Brazil -4.1 3.6 General Govt. gross debt Brazil# 95.6 92.1
(per cent) Russia -3.0 3.0 (as per cent of GDP) Russia 21.0 20.7
India -8.0 11.5 India 85.5 83.1
China 2.3 8.1 China 65.2 69.4
South Africa -7.0 2.8 South Africa 77.7 84.9
Country 2020 2021(P) Country 2020 (P) 2021 (P)
CPI inflation rate (per cent) Brazil 3.2 2.9 Current account balance Brazil 0.3 0.02
Russia 3.4 3.2 (as per cent of GDP) Russia 1.2 1.8
India 6.1@ 3.7 India 0.3 -0.9
China 2.5 2.7 China 1.3 0.7
South Africa 3.3 3.9 South Africa -1.6 -1.8
Country 2020 (P) 2021(P) Country 2020 2021(P)
General Govt. net lending/ Brazil -16.8 -6.5 Forex reserves* Brazil 355.6 356.1
borrowing (as per cent of Russia -5.3 -2.6 (in US$ billion) Russia 596.1 586.3
GDP)
India -13.1 -10.9 India 588.4 586.7
China -11.9 -11.8 China 3536.0 3528.8
South Africa -14.0 -11.1 South Africa 54.2 53.3
P: Projection. E: Estimate.
*: Forex reserves for 2021 pertain to February 2021.
#: Gross debt refers to the nonfinancial public sector, excluding Eletrobras and Petrobras, and includes sovereign debt held by the central bank.
@: Average of the period from June 2020 to February 2021.
Notes: India's data correspond to fiscal year (April-March).
Sources: Bloomberg; Official statistical agency of each country; WEO October 2020 database and January 2021 Update; IMF Fiscal Monitor Update, January
2021; and IRFCL, IMF.
The Brazilian economy contracted in Q4 on y-o-y basis a slow vaccine rollout and renewed load shedding.
following declines in household and government These factors extended into Q1:2021. Across major
consumption expenditure, while weak services and South-East Asian economies, GDP declined in
external sector activity added further downward
Q4:2020, with contraction varying in the range of
pressures. The near-term growth outlook remains
(-) 2.2 per cent to (-) 8.3 per cent (y-o-y) as the virus
clouded with emergency transfer programs expected
impeded economic activity.
to unwind, while the more contagious COVID-19 P1
The global composite PMI moderated during
variant continues to spread rapidly weighing heavily
on economic activity with the composite PMI reflecting November-January within the expansion zone as
contraction since January 2021. the resurgence of infections across major economies
pulled down services activity, especially in the
The Russian economy contracted in 2020, with a
contact-intensive industries. There was some uptick
modest recovery in H2 (July-December) preventing
in February readings for both manufacturing and
a deeper plunge. The South African economy
services activity on the back of the strong performance
rebounded sharply in Q3:2020 following a historic
plunge in Q2, driven primarily by manufacturing, in the US (Chart V.1a). Composite leading indicators
mining and trade activity. In Q4, the recovery slowed (CLIs) suggest growth is stabilising across major AEs
down, with new waves of the deadly virus amidst and EMEs (Chart V.1b).

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart V.1: Survey Indicators
a: Composite PMI b: OECD CLIs
Sources: Bloomberg; and OECD.
Global trade recovered faster than expected from products have started showing signs of deceleration.
the deep contraction witnessed in Q2:2020 on the The Baltic Dry Index, which measures shipping
back of the robust trade performance of EMEs (Chart costs for a wide variety of bulk commodities such
V.2a). The WTO’s Goods Trade Barometer rebounded as coal, iron ore, and grain, rose sharply in January
in Q4:2020; however, this momentum is unlikely and February 2021 due to firming container shipping
to be sustained in H1:2021 (January-June) as its key freight rates and an unfavourable base effect
constituents such as export orders and automotive (Chart V.2b).
Chart V.2: World Trade Volume
a: World Trade Volume: Relative Contribution b: Movement in World Trade Volume and Baltic Index
Sources: CPB Netherlands; and CEIC.

Chapter V External Environment
V.2 Commodity Prices and Inflation cut production by an additional 1.0 million barrels
per day during February-April added to bullish
Global commodity prices have been rising since May,
sentiments. Following an attack on Saudi Arabia’s oil
after recovering from a plunge in the early part of 2020.
facilities, Brent prices increased further, moving closer
The Bloomberg commodity price index increased by
to US$70 per barrel in mid-March. However, prices
17.8 per cent between September 2020 and March
corrected thereafter, on near-term demand concerns
2021. The food price index of the Food and Agriculture
amidst rising infections and build up in the US crude
Organization (FAO) increased by 18.4 per cent between
inventories. Despite the correction, Brent crude prices
September 2020 and February 2021 – the index was
increased by 21.9 per cent in Q1:2021 (Chart 3b).
at its highest level in February 2021 since July 2014,
with pressures being particularly high for vegetable oil Base metal prices, measured by the Bloomberg’s base
prices due to tightening availability of supplies among metal spot index, increased by 28.4 per cent between
major exporters. For meat, low demand for poultry September 2020 and March 2021, surpassing
meat amidst avian influenza outbreaks has kept price
pre-COVID levels on strong rallies witnessed in
pressures somewhat muted (Chart V.3a).
H2:2020. The upturn has been primarily driven
Crude oil prices lost some steam in September- by strong restocking by China and positive
October on waning demand prospects but have sentiments propelled by stimulus measures
picked up since November on vaccine optimism and across major economies. The robust recovery in
extension of production cuts by OPEC plus. The US manufacturing and industrial activity along with
stimulus and Brexit agreement further boosted the persistent supply chain disruptions, shipping
market sentiments. In February, prices surged to their difficulties and labour and container shortages have
highest level since the pandemic amidst tightening boosted prices of industrial metals. In contrast,
global supplies and falling crude inventories in the gold prices after wrapping up the year 2020 with a
US and Europe. Saudi Arabia’s decision to voluntarily phenomenal gain of 25.1 per cent, lost sheen with
Chart V.3: Commodity Prices
a: FAO Food Price Indices b: Energy and Crude Oil Prices
Sources: FAO; and World Bank.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart V.4: Metal Price Indices
Source: Bloomberg.
prices correcting by 10.0 per cent in Q1:2021. Rising
Table V.3: Inflation Performance
US bond yields, the strengthening US dollar and (Per cent)
strong risk-on sentiments reduced the safe haven Country Inflation Q1:2020 Q2:2020 Q3:2020 Q4:2020 Q1:2021
Target
appeal of the yellow metal (Chart V.4).
Advanced Economies
Canada 1.0-3.0 1.8 0.0 0.2 0.8 1.1
CPI inflation remains benign and below target in
Euro area 2.0 1.1 0.2 0.0 -0.3 1.0
major AEs, while for major EMEs, barring China, Japan 2.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 -0.8 -0.5
UK 2.0 1.7 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.6
Thailand and Indonesia, CPI inflation has mostly
US 2.0 1.7 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.5
picked up, even moving above targets in a few of them Emerging Market Economies
(Table V.3). Brazil 3.75 ± 1.5 3.8 2.1 2.6 4.2 4.9
Russia 4.0 2.4 3.1 3.6 4.4 5.5
In the US, inflation based on the personal consumer India 4.0 ± 2.0 6.7 6.2* 6.9 6.4 4.5
China - 5.0 2.7 2.3 0.1 -0.3
expenditures (PCE) price index has risen since
South Africa 3.0-6.0 4.4 2.4 3.1 3.2 3.1
December. However, average inflation remains well Indonesia 3.0 ± 1.0 2.9 2.3 1.4 1.6 1.5
Philippines 3.0 ± 1.0 2.7 2.3 2.5 3.1 4.5
below the Fed’s 2 per cent target as relatively soft Thailand 1.0-3.0 0.4 -2.7 -0.7 -0.4 -0.5
Turkey 5.0 12.1 11.7 11.8 13.5 15.6
aggregate demand and earlier declines in consumer
*: Data refer to June 2020 only.
energy prices contained price pressures. Inflation
Notes: (1) Inflation for the US is in terms of personal consumption
expectations have, however, shown some uptick in expenditure.
(2) Quarterly inflation is the simple average of inflation in each
the latest readings of survey-based measures. After month of the quarter. Q1:2021 is the average of the months for
which data are available.
being in deflation for the last five months of 2020,
(3) The ECB aims at inflation rates of below, but close to 2%. The
Euro area CPI inflation has moved back to the positive Fed adopted ‘flexible average inflation targeting’ in August 2020
wherein it would allow the inflation rate to go above the target
zone since January 2021 on rising cost of services of 2 per cent rate for brief periods to make up for the shortfall
from the target in earlier periods. Bank of Canada aims to keep
and non-energy industrial goods with energy prices
inflation at the 2 per cent mid-point of an inflation control
rebounding in March. Nonetheless, inflation remains target range of 1-3 per cent.
(4) Brazil’s inflation target for 2020 was 4.0 ± 1.5 per cent.
low and below the ECB’s target owing to substantial Sources: Central bank websites; and Bloomberg.

Chapter V External Environment
slack in product and labour markets. In Japan, CPI and utilities, and miscellaneous goods and services. In
remained in deflation for the fifth consecutive month February, however, it eased marginally, moving below
in February as COVID-19 weighed on demand; lower the central bank’s target range on softening health
crude oil prices in the initial period and discounts and food prices. China, on the other hand, registered
on travel within Japan through the ‘Go To Travel’ deflation since November, barring December. There
campaign by the national government added to the has been a significant easing in consumer prices due to
downside. In the UK, CPI inflation remains relatively lower pork prices on improved supply and favourable
subdued over both direct and indirect COVID-induced
base effects. Renewed lockdown restrictions due
factors, particularly the reduction in value added tax
to fresh outbreaks resulting in decreased travel and
for certain services and lower energy prices. Despite
consumer spending before the Chinese new year in
some pick-up in December-January, it remains way
February also kept the price pressures low (Chart V.5b).
below the Bank of England’s (BoE's) target (Chart V.5a).
V.3 Monetary Policy Stance
In Russia, the inflation rate has overshot the target
In order to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19
since November 2020, primarily attributed to the
pandemic on their domestic economies, governments
weakening ruble and firming global commodity prices,
and central banks have provided unprecedented
especially food prices, besides the lingering supply side
and large fiscal and monetary stimuli since March
disruptions inflicted by the pandemic. In Brazil too,
CPI inflation has edged up, though it remains within 2020. The IMF estimates that the total fiscal support
the central bank’s target range. The increase in global pledged in 2020 through additional spending, revenue
commodity prices, the depreciating Brazilian real and foregone and liquidity support was about US$14
rapid recovery in domestic demand supported by trillion or 13.5 per cent of world GDP (Table V.4).
emergency aid programs, led to the upward pressures Monetary policy turned even more accommodative
in prices. CPI inflation in South Africa saw some with expansion of asset purchase programmes and
uptick in January on higher prices for food, housing launch/extension of special liquidity programmes by
Chart V.5: CPI Inflation (y-o-y) – Select Economies
a: Advanced Economies b: Emerging Market Economies
Source: Bloomberg.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
limit for overnight reverse repo to US$80 billion from
Table V.4: Fiscal Support in 2020 in
Response to COVID-19 US$30 billion.
(Amount in US$ billion; Per cent as proportion of GDP)
The European Central Bank (ECB) in its December
Country Amount Per cent
2020 meeting increased purchases under the
Advanced Economies - 24.0
Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP) by
Canada 306 18.7
500 billion (approximately US$607 billion)1 to
European Union 1,358 10.6
Japan 2,210 44.0 1.85 trillion (approximately US$2.25 trillion) and
UK 877 32.4
extended the horizon for purchases by nine months to
US 4,013 19.2
end-March 2022. Furthermore, it also extended the
Emerging Market Economies - 6.1
Brazil 206 14.5 period for the more favourable terms of the third series
Russia 63 4.4 of the targeted longer-term refinancing operations by 12
India 215 8.1
months to June 2022, besides other recalibrations. The
China 904 6.0
South Africa 28 9.8 collateral easing measures were extended up to June
Source: IMF Fiscal Monitor Update, January 2021. 2022. Four additional Pandemic Emergency Longer-
Term Refinancing Operations would be conducted in
central banks in most AEs and EMEs in Q4:2020. Rate
2021. The Eurosystem repo facility for central banks
cuts continued in both Q4:2020 and Q1:2021, mainly
and all temporary swap/repo lines with non-euro area
by EMEs. A few major EMEs, however, raised rates in
central banks were extended till March 2022. In March
March in response to inflation concerns.
2021, the ECB said that purchases under the PEPP
The Fed has maintained the target range for the federal would be at a significantly higher pace over the next
funds rate at 0 to 0.25 per cent since March 2020. The quarter compared to the initial months of the year.
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has since
The BoE has maintained a pause on the Bank Rate at
December 2020 stated that monthly asset purchases
its all-time low of 0.1 per cent since March 2020. In
of at least US$80 billion of Treasury securities and
its November 2020 meeting, the BoE increased the
US$40 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities
target stock of purchase of UK government bonds
would continue till further progress has been made
by an additional £150 billion (approximately US$197
towards the maximum employment and price stability
billion). In March 2021, the UK government updated
goals. The Fed also extended the temporary dollar
the remit of BoE’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC)
liquidity swap lines and the temporary repurchase
to reflect the “government’s economic strategy for
agreement facility for foreign and international
achieving strong, sustainable and balanced growth that
monetary authorities up to September 2021. In
is also environmentally sustainable and consistent
March, the Fed extended the Paycheck Protection
with the transition to a net zero economy.”2 Given the
Program Liquidity facility by three months up to June
implications of climate change for monetary policy
2021 to provide support for the flow of credit to small
and financial stability, a number of central banks are
businesses. The FOMC increased the per counterparty
actively pursuing green goals (Box V.1).
1 The US$ approximations for all amounts mentioned in another currency in this Chapter are based on the exchange rate (Bloomberg) on the date of
announcement of the particular measure.
2 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/letter/2021/march/2021-mpc-remit-letter.pdf?la=en&hash=C3A91905E1A58A3A98071B2DD41E65
FAFD1CF03E

Chapter V External Environment
Box V.1: Central Bank Actions to Mitigate Climate Change Risk: Cross-country Experience
In 2020, the average temperature of global land and ocean accurately, including exposure to “green swan”3 risks,
surfaces was 1.17°C higher than the twentieth-century which are in nature of “climate black swan events”, i.e.,
average of 13.9°C, making it the second warmest year on extreme financially disruptive events that could be the
record. The five warmest years since 1880 have been only next systemic financial crisis (Bolton et al. 2020).
recently after 2015 (Chart V.1.1a). Global temperatures
In 2017, eight central banks and supervisors established
are expected to increase by another 1.5 degree between
the Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for
2030 and 2052, and to continue upwards thereafter
Greening the Financial System (NGFS) which had 89
[Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
central banks and supervisors from around the world
2018]. The rise in global temperature is mainly attributed
to an increase in greenhouse gas emissions. As a result, by March 2021. The NGFS recommended integration
El Niño–Southern Oscillation changes in the global of climate-related factors into prudential supervision
atmospheric circulation have been wild, influencing, and emphasised the importance of a robust and
in turn, temperature and precipitation across the globe internationally consistent climate and environmental
(Chart V.1.1b). disclosure framework. A recent survey of 26 central
banks reveals that central banks consider climate change
The higher global temperatures and the associated shifts in
to be an emerging challenge both in terms of its potential
weather patterns are key risks to the growth and inflation
threat to the economy and impact on their operational
outlook across AEs and EMEs through various channels.
frameworks (NGFS, 2020). The prime motivation for
While the most evident channel is agricultural output,
others could be adverse effects on labour productivity, the central banks is to mitigate financial risks on their
mortality rates and investment decisions (Acevedo et al., balance sheets due to exposures to climate change
2018; Batten, 2020). Thus, climate change poses severe related risks. Furthermore, central banks are in favour
challenges to the central banks’ mandate of price and of formulating pro-active measures in moving towards a
financial stability. Conventional models followed by low-carbon economy while ensuring smooth monetary
the central banks cannot predict climate-related risks transmission over the long-term (Table V.1.1).
Chart V.1.1: Evolving Climate Change Risk
a: Global Surface Temperature Anomalies @ b: Southern Oscillation Index
@: Deviations of average annual global surface temperatures (land and ocean) since 1880 from the long-term average (1901-2000).
Note: The Southern Oscillation Index (SOI) measures large-scale fluctuations in air pressure occurring between the western and the eastern tropical Pacific during El Niño and
La Niña episodes. In general, smoothed time series of the SOI correspond very well with changes in ocean temperatures across the eastern tropical Pacific. Prolonged periods of
negative (positive) SOI values coincide with abnormally warm (cold) ocean waters across the eastern tropical Pacific typical of El Niño (La Niña) episodes.
Sources: NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information, Climate at a Glance: Global Time Series, published March 2021, retrieved on March 31, 2021 from
https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cag/; and https://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/data/indices/soi.
(Contd.)
3 The concept of “green swan” used by Bolton et al. (2020) was inspired by the famous concept of “black swan” developed by Taleb (2007) [Taleb, Nassim
N. 2007. The Black Swan. New York: Penguin Random House]. Black swan events are rare and unexpected events with low probability but heavy impacts.
Such events can only be explained after they happen.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Table V.1.1: Mitigating Climate Change Risk – Select Central Bank Initiatives
Central Strategy Central Strategy
Bank Bank
Advanced Economies
Bank of • Pilot project to help banks and insurance companies to Hong • Developed a common assessment framework to help banks to
Canada develop climate change risk scenarios Kong assess their individual “greenness baseline”
• A multi-year research plan focused on climate-related risks Monetary • Banks were advised to assess climate-related physical risk and
and Canada-specific climate scenarios by staff members Authority transition risk associated with the projects and businesses they
(HKMA) are funding
• Assistance to the Government in implementation of green bond
issuance programme
Bank of • In March 2021, the Monetary Policy Committee's remit was Reserve • Supervisory engagement on the identification and management of
England modified to include support to the Government's economic Bank climate risks among New Zealand’s financial institutions
(BoE) strategy of transition to a net zero emissions economy o Z f e a N la e n w d • Better management of RBNZ balance sheet to mitigate climate
• Became member of the government-regulator task force (RBNZ) change risk
to examine the most effective way to approach climate
related financial disclosures, including exploring the
appropriateness of mandatory reporting
European • Set up a climate change centre in January 2021 to bring Federal • The Federal Reserve supervisors expect banks to have systems in
Central together the work on climate issues in different parts of Reserve place that appropriately identify, measure, control, and monitor all
Bank (ECB) the ECB of their material risks, “which for many banks are likely to extend
• Climate risk stress test exercise to assess the impact on the to climate risks.”
European banking sector over a 30-year horizon • Formally joined the Network for Greening the Financial System in
December 2020
Emerging Market Economies
Banco • Capital requirements guidelines for banks for pricing-in environmental risks through which banks evaluate lending practices, stress-test against
Central do the exposure to environmental risks and disclose their risk assessment methods and exposure to social and environmental damages
Brasil
People's • Issued green bond guidelines for building a green finance system in 2015
Bank of • Mandatory for financial institutions to disclose environment-related information to support and incentivise green investment
China
(PBoC) • Incentives included, among others, for re-lending operations by the PBoC, specialised green guarantee programs, interest subsides for green
loan-supported projects, and the launch of a national-level green development fund
Reserve • In 2015, included the small renewable energy sector under the Priority Sector Lending (PSL) scheme
Bank of • Sensitising public, investors and banks regarding the need, opportunities, and challenges of green finance through its regular reports and other
India communications
Source: Websites of respective central banks.
To sum up, changing weather patterns and increased Batten, S., R. Sowerbutts and M. Tanaka (2020), “Climate
reliance on bioenergy could increase the volatility of food Change: Macroeconomic Impact and Implications
and energy prices and hence impart substantial volatility for Monetary Policy”, in: Ecological, Societal, and
to headline inflation, making it challenging for central Technological Risks and the Financial Sector, July 2020.
banks to meet their inflation targets. Nowcasting and
Bolton P., D. Morgan, da Silva. L. A. P., S. Frédéric and S.
forecasting models of central banks need to be augmented Romain (2020), The Green Swan: Central Banking and
to adequately account for weather effects. Financial Stability in the Age of Climate Change, Bank for
International Settlements.
References:
IPCC (2018), Global Warming of 1.5oC. Available at: https://
www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
Acevedo, S., M. Mrkaic, N. Novta, E. Pugacheva and
P. Topalova (2018), “The Effects of Weather Shocks on NGFS (2020), “Survey on Monetary Policy Operations and
Economic Activity: What are the Channels of Impact?”, Climate Change: Key Lessons for Further Analyses”, NGFS
IMF Working Paper, WP/18/144s. Technical Document, December.

Chapter V External Environment
The Bank of Japan (BoJ) in December 2020 extended policy relating to sustainable house prices. In March,
the duration of the special program to support the RBNZ withdrew a few temporary liquidity
financing in response to COVID-19 by six months facilities, which were introduced in response to the
to September 2021 and made adjustments to the COVID-19 pandemic, as they had low usage.
programme. Following a review of the measures
Amongst the major AE central banks, Australia and
taken under “quantitative and qualitative monetary
Iceland reduced policy rates in Q4:2020. In November,
easing with yield curve control”, the BoJ announced
the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) cuts its policy rate
further effective and sustainable monetary easing in by 15 bps to a new low of 0.10 per cent and reduced
March 2021: (i) establishment of an “Interest Scheme the target for 3-year government bond yields to the
to Promote Lending” under which interest rates, same level. It also launched a quantitative easing
linked to the short-term policy rate, would apply as programme of purchase of government bonds of 5-10
an incentive to financial institutions' current account years maturity worth AUD100 billion (approximately
balances with the BoJ, corresponding to amount lent US$72 billion) to be carried out over six months. In
by the institutions under eligible fund-provisioning February 2021, the RBA extended the asset purchase
measures; (ii) the range of 10-year government bond programme that was to end by mid-April 2021 by six
yield fluctuations would be +/- 25 basis points (bps) months with purchase of additional AUD100 billion
from the target level; and (iii) the annual target for (approximately US$76 billion). In March, the RBA
purchase of exchange-traded funds and Japan real indicated that it had adjusted bond purchases to
estate investment trusts has been removed, while the enable smooth functioning of the market and would
ceiling has been retained. do more, if required. The central bank of Iceland
reduced its policy rate by 25 bps in November to 0.75
The Bank of Canada (BoC) has maintained a pause
per cent (Chart V.6a).
on the policy rate since reducing it to 0.25 per cent
Given the conventional policy space, a few EMEs cut
in March 2020. In October, the BoC announced it
the policy rates further in 2021, while others started
would gradually reduce quantum of weekly purchase
reversing monetary stimulus. The People’s Bank of
of government securities, while recalibrating its
China has maintained the one-year Loan Prime Rate
quantitative easing program towards longer-term
at 3.85 per cent since April 2020, while the South
bonds that have a more direct influence on borrowing
African Reserve Bank has maintained its policy rate at
rates.
3.5 per cent since July 2020. After maintaining a pause
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) has
through Q4:2020, in January 2021, Banco Central do
maintained its policy rate at the historic low of 0.25
Brasil (BCB) withdrew the forward guidance introduced
per cent since March 2020. In November, the RBNZ
in August 2020 when the underlying measures of
announced additional stimulus in the form of a inflation were below the target. In its March meeting,
“Funding for Lending Programme” aimed at reducing with inflation projected to be at the upper bound of
banks’ funding costs. In February 2021, the RBNZ the target, the BCB raised the Selic rate by 75 bps to
stated that it had completed the operational work to 2.75 per cent and indicated that a similar magnitude
make its policy rate, the official cash rate, negative if hike will likely be effected in its next policy meeting.
need arose for further monetary stimulus. The New The Bank of Russia, after maintaining a pause through
Zealand government modified the MPC’s remit with Q4:2020, raised the policy rate by 25 bps to 4.5 per
effect from March 1, 2021 to assess and outline, inter cent in March and indicated that it was a beginning of
alia, the impact of its decisions on the government’s return to neutral monetary policy.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
Chart V.6: Policy Rate Changes – Select Major Economies
a: Advanced Economies b: Emerging Market Economies
Source: Bloomberg.
The central bank of Turkey followed up the rate hike Among AEs, US equity markets scaled new peaks every
in September 2020 with an increase of 475 bps in month between November 2020 and March 2021.
November and by another 200 bps each in December Apart from the earlier noted ultra-accommodative
2020 and March 2021 and indicated that the tight monetary policy and vaccine news, the US markets
monetary policy stance would be maintained decisively were also boosted by the Presidential election results
for an extended period until strong indicators pointed in early November and the additional fiscal stimulus
to a permanent fall in inflation. Amongst other EME packages in December and March. In Q1:2021, there
central banks, Bank Indonesia (BI) and Bangko Sentral were episodes of correction, mostly due to surge in
ng Pilipinas cut their policy rates by 25 bps each in yields in the bond market.
Q4: 2020 (November), while BI and Banco de México
Among other major AEs also, November 2020 was one
cut rates by 25 bps each in February during Q1:2021
of the best months on record in terms of gains. The
(Chart V.6b).
UK and the EU stock indices moved up, benefitting
V.4 Global Financial Markets
additionally from the trade agreement concluded
The global financial markets remained buoyant, before the expiry of the transitional period following
supported by highly accommodative monetary and Brexit. Towards end-January 2021, these indices
fiscal policies and vaccine-led recovery optimism. Stock corrected due to the volatility brought on by US
markets reached record highs in a few jurisdictions markets and again in the second half of February. In
in February 2021, despite output being well-below March, the indices were up again to almost 13-month
pre-pandemic path, raising concerns of a disconnect highs. The Nikkei crossed 30,000 in February 2021
between the markets and the real economy and risks for the first time since 1990. Stock markets in EMEs
of future financial fragility (Box V.2). powered further ahead through Q4:2020 and up to

Chapter V External Environment
Box V.2: Financial Markets and Real Economy Disconnect – Bubble or Retreat?
Under the unprecedented and continuing monetary markets at the global level. The variables included in the
accommodation by most central banks, financial empirical exercise are: MSCI world stock index (LWorld_
markets across the world have been exuberant. Equity stk), World GDP (LWorld_GDP), gold prices (LGold) and
markets touched record highs, even as COVID-19 yield on 10-year US government securities (US_10yr)4. All
pushed the global economy into its severest contraction the variables are integrated of order one, i.e., I(1), and the
in decades. This is in sharp contrast to the typical co- Johansen-cointegration test reveals the presence of one
movement between the equity markets and the real long-run cointegrating relationship5. The estimated long-
economy, especially in severely stressed situations run equation from a vector error correction model (VECM)
(Chart V.2.1). is as follows:
The apparent disconnect between the real economy and LWorld_stk=5.34+1.98LWorld_GDP– 1.11LGold
asset prices could be due to non-price factors (Claessens (9.99) (11.01)
and Kose, 2017). A steep decline in risk premiums and
- 0.12US_10yr ... ... ...(1)
risk-free discount rates have driven up asset prices (Igan
et al., 2020). Certain segments of the equity markets, (2.97)
particularly small-cap, health and pharmaceuticals,
Figures in parentheses are estimated t-values. All
and technology notched higher gains than others.
coefficients are statistically significant at 1 per cent level.
Despite episodic corrections, the US S&P and the Indian
BSE Sensex, inter alia, reached all-time highs in Q1:2021. The results suggest that higher real GDP growth boosts
Though reflation trade, creeping bond yields and inflation equity prices, while higher interest rates and gold prices
expectations led to a correction in the stock markets in are associated with corrections in equity prices. A higher
the latter part of February, markets picked up again in level of GDP growth translates to higher corporate
March with the US stimulus, mainly in AEs. earnings, which in turn results in higher equity returns
(Gracia and Liu, 1999). Rise in yields and gold prices
Against this backdrop, a preliminary examination has
been undertaken to understand the drivers of stock presents portfolio diversification options, and are
Chart V.2.1: Equity Markets and GDP – Growth Rates
a: World b: AEs c: EMEs
Sources: IMF; Bloomberg; and RBI staff estimates.
(Contd.)
4 All data, barring LWorld_GDP, were sourced from Bloomberg. For LWorld_GDP, annual world GDP levels given by the IMF were interpolated to obtain
quarterly series. The sample period is from Q1:2005 to Q4:2020.
5 To control for periods of excessive volatility and uncertainty in economic conditions, three dummies, viz., Dummy_COVID, Dummy_TT and Dummy_
GFC for COVID-19, taper tantrum and global financial crisis episodes, respectively, were included.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
of the ΔLWorld_stk is statistically significant with the
Table V.1.1: Short-run Estimates of Change in
World Stock Prices correct negative sign implying that the stock prices
adjust towards long-run relationship after a shock and
Coefficient P-values
that the estimated model is stable (Table V.1.1). In the
ECT -0.238 0.026**
case of a shock, gold prices are the quickest to adjust,
0.321 0.295 followed by stock prices.
Summing up, unprecedented large scale monetary and
1.476 0.063*
fiscal accommodation by most countries and vaccine
optimism have contributed to a sharp rebound in stock
-0.169 0.484
markets across the world. The empirical evidence still
-0.137 0.019** supports the conventional wisdom that a long-run
relationship holds between the financial markets and the
Dummy_COVID 0.044 0.313
Dummy_GFC -0.064 0.013** real sector.
Dummy_TT 0.042 0.272
References:
Adjusted R2 0.47
Memo: VEC Residual Portmanteau Tests for Autocorrelations Claessens, S. and M. A. Kose, (2017), “Asset Prices and
Lags Adj. Q-Stat. P-value Macroeconomic Outcomes: A Survey”, World Bank Group
4 33.765 0.209 Policy Research Working Paper 8259.
Notes: 1. All variables are in log form, barring the 10-year yield, which
Garcia, V.F. and L. Liu (1999), “Macroeconomic
is in percentage points. The model was estimated with lag order of 3.
2. * and ** indicate statistical significance at 10 and 5 per cent level, Determinants of Stock Market Development”, Journal of
respectively.
Applied Economics, 2, pp.29–59.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
Igan, D., D. Kirti and M. S. Peria (2020), “The Disconnect
inversely related to stock prices. The short-run dynamics between Financial Markets and the Real Economy”, IMF
show that the coefficient of the error correction term Special Notes Series on COVID-19, August 26.
mid Q1:2021, mirroring those in the US and other AEs expectations. In February, the large sell-offs saw longer
and supported by burgeoning foreign portfolio flows term yields, especially of the 10-year and 30-year bonds
(Chart V.7). With resumption of capital outflows since shoot up, leading to steepening of the yield curve. The
the latter part of February, EME stock indices have 10-year yield at end-March 2021 was 106 bps higher
shed gains. than its level at end-September 2020.
Bond yields remained low in major AEs till end- There has also been a steepening of the yield curve
2020 driven by low or negative policy rates, forward in several other countries, both AEs and EMEs,
guidance of low for longer, explicit yield curve control
particularly since the second half of February. Low
policies in a few countries and safe haven demand
policy rates have kept the short-term yields low, while
due to continued uncertainty with new rounds of
longer maturities have been rising. This necessitated
infections, fatalities and virus mutations. In the US,
further bond purchases by countries like Australia
however, bond yields have been inching up gradually
which practice yield curve control. The rise in yields
from Q3:2020 on expectations of reflation (Chart V.8a).
led to portfolio reallocation resulting in correction in
In January 2021, the 10-year yield rose above 1 per cent
equity markets noted above.
for the first time since March 2020 on expectations of
further stimulus by the new US administration, better In currency markets, the US dollar weakened further
economic recovery prospects and rising inflation in Q4:2020. In 2021, it has strengthened mainly due to

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.7: Equity Markets
a: Equity Indices (MSCI) b: Change in Equity Indices
Sources: Bloomberg; and RBI staff estimates.
rising bond yields and expectations of higher inflation the emerging markets currencies to depreciate
and higher interest rates. As regards emerging market (Chart V.8b). The MSCI Emerging Market Currency
currencies, there has been resumption of capital Index, which increased by 5.3 per cent in Q4:2020,
outflows in Q1:2021 from most regions, causing dipped by 1.1 per cent in Q1:2021.
Chart V.8: Bond Yields and Currency Movements
a: 10-year Sovereign Bond Yields in Select AEs b: Currency Indices
Source: Bloomberg.

Monetary Policy Report April 2021
V.5 Conclusion
inflation and consequent movements in the bond
In 2021, real GDP is expected to register a strong markets lead to large valuation shifts in equity and
rebound following the record contraction in the other financial markets, it could lead to extreme
previous year. The actual outcome will depend on volatility in global financial markets which could
how the race against the virus and its mutations is then spill over to emerging economies and impede
won. Inflation concerns are creeping up at a time the nascent global recovery. Monetary authorities in
when both monetary and fiscal policies are highly major advanced economies need to remain vigilant to
accommodative, there are promises of continued these developments and be sensitive to the spillovers
low rates for long and demand is recovering. If rising of their policies to the rest of the world.