Published under Section 45ZM of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
Monetary Policy Report
SEPTEMBER 2022
Reserve Bank of India
Mumbai
Contents
Chapter I: Macroeconomic Outlook 1
I.1: Key Developments since the April 2022 MPR 1
I.2: The Outlook for Inflation 6
I.3: The Outlook for Growth 10
I.4: Balance of Risks 12
I.5: Conclusion 14
Box I.1: Macroeconomic Implications of Low Global Growth and High Global Inflation 5
Box I.2: Global Cost-Push Spillovers on Inflation: Insights from World Input-Output Tables 8
Chapter II: Prices and Costs 15
II.1: Consumer Prices 16
II.2: Drivers of Inflation 20
II.3: Costs 32
II.4: Conclusion 35
Box II.1: Inflation and Inflation Uncertainty in India 18
Box II.2: An Examination of the Rural Prices and Wages Dynamics in India 33
Chapter III: Demand and Output 36
III.1: Aggregate Demand 36
III.2: Aggregate Supply 48
III.3: Conclusion 57
Box III.1: Drivers of India’s Merchandise Exports and Imports 46
Chapter IV: Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions 58
IV.1: Domestic Financial Markets 58
IV.2: Monetary Policy Transmission 75
IV.3: Liquidity Conditions and the Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy 79
IV.4: Conclusion 81
Box IV.1: Monetary Policy Surprises and Financial Markets 62
Chapter V: External Environment 82
V.1: Global Economic Conditions 82
V.2: Commodity Prices and Inflation 85
V.3: Monetary Policy Stance 88
V.4: Global Financial Markets 91
V.5: Conclusion 94
Box V.1: High Inflation and Aggressive Monetary Tightening: Soft or Hard Landing? 89
i
ABBREVIATIONS
AEs - Advanced Economies CLI - Composite Leading Indicator
AEs - Advance Estimates CMIE - Centre for Monitoring Indian
Economy
AIDC - Agriculture Infrastructure and
Development Cess COVID-19 - Coronavirus Disease 2019
APP - Asset Purchase Programme CP - Commercial Paper
ASEAN - Association of Southeast Asian
CPB - Central Planning Bureau
Nations
CPI - Consumer Price Index
ATF - Aviation Turbine Fuel
CPI-AL - Consumer Price Index for
ATM - At the money
Agricultural Labourers
BCD - Basic Customs Duty
CPI-IW - Consumer Price Index for Industrial
BE - Budget Estimates Workers
BEI - Business Expectations Index CPI-RL - Consumer Price Index for Rural
BIES - Business Inflation Expectations Labourers
Survey
CRR - Cash Reserve Ratio
BIS - Bank for International Settlements
CU - Capacity Utilisation
BoE - Bank of England
DCA - Department of Consumer Affairs
BoJ - Bank of Japan
DGCA - Directorate General of Civil Aviation
bps - Basis Points
DGCI&S - Directorate General of Commercial
BRICS - Brazil, Russia, India, China and Intelligence and Statistics
South Africa
DI - Diffusion Index
BSE - Bombay Stock Exchange
DII - Domestic Institutional Investor
CACP - Commission for Agricultural Costs
EBIT - Earnings Before Interest and Taxes
and Prices
EBLR - External Benchmark Lending Rate
CAG - Comptroller and Auditor General
ECB - European Central Bank
CCIL - Clearing Corporation of India
Limited ECBs - External Commercial Borrowings
CD - Certificate of Deposit ECI - Eight Core Industries
CDS - Credit Default Swap ECLGS - Emergency Credit Line Guarantee
CGA - Controller General of Accounts Scheme
CI - Confidence Interval ECT - Error Correction Term
CiC - Currency in Circulation EIA - Energy Information Administration
CII - Confederation of Indian Industry EMEs - Emerging Market Economies
iiiiii
Monetary Policy Report September 2022
EPFO - Employees’ Provident Fund GST - Goods and Services Tax
Organisation
GVA - Gross Value Added
FAO - Food and Agriculture Organization
H1 - First Half of the Financial Year
FBIL - Financial Benchmarks India Pvt. Ltd (April-September)
FCNR(B) - Foreign Currency Non-Resident H2 - Second Half of the Financial Year
(Bank) (October-March)
FDI - Foreign Direct Investment HFI - High Frequency Indicator
Fed - Federal Reserve HSD - High-Speed Diesel
FICCI - Federation of Indian Chambers of ICIO - Inter Country Input Output
Commerce and Industry
ICR - Interest Coverage Ratio
FIMMDA - Fixed Income Money Market and
IIF - Institute of International Finance
Derivatives Association of India
IIP - Index of Industrial Production
FIs - Financial Institutions
IMD - India Meteorological Department
FL - Family Labour
IMF - International Monetary Fund
FMCG - Fast-Moving Consumer Goods
INR - Indian Rupee
FOMC - Federal Open Market Committee
IOCL - Indian Oil Corporation Limited
FPI - Foreign Portfolio Investment/
Investor IPO - Initial Public Offering
FRE - First Revised Estimate IRDAI - Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority
FRRR - Fixed Rate Reverse Repo
IRFCL - International Reserves and Foreign
F-TRAC - FIMMDA Trade Reporting and
Currency Liquidity
Confirmation System
IT - Information Technology
FTSE - Financial Times Stock Exchange
GDP - Gross Domestic Product JSE - Johannesburg Stock Exchange
GFCE - Government Final Consumption LAF - Liquidity Adjustment Facility
Expenditure
LIC - Life Insurance Corporation of India
GFCF - Gross Fixed Capital Formation
LMT - Lakh Metric Tonnes
GFD - Gross Fiscal Deficit
LPA - Long Period Average
GM - Genetically Modified
LPG - Liquefied Petroleum Gas
GNDI - Gross National Disposable Income
LPR - Loan Prime Rate
GoI - Government of India
MCLR - Marginal Cost of Funds Based
GSDP - Gross State Domestic Product Lending Rate
G-Secs - Government Securities MFs - Mutual Funds
iivv
Abbreviations
MGNREGA - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural OECD - Organisation for Economic
Employment Guarantee Act Co-operation and Development
MMRP - Modified Mixed Reference Period OIS - Overnight Indexed Swaps
MoAFW - Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ OMCs - Oil Marketing Companies
Welfare OMO - Open Market Operations
MOEX - Moscow Exchange OPEC - Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries
MoH&FW - Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare OTC - Over-the-Counter
m-o-m - Month-on-Month PA - Provisional Accounts
MOSPI - Ministry of Statistics and Programme PADO - Public Administration, Defence and
Implementation Other Services
MPC - Monetary Policy Committee PBoC - People’s Bank of China
MPR - Monetary Policy Report PCE - Personal Consumption Expenditure
PDS - Public Distribution System
MSCI - Morgan Stanley Capital International
PE - Provisional Estimates
MSF - Marginal Standing Facility
PEPP - Pandemic Emergency Purchase
MSMEs - Micro, Small and Medium
Programme
Enterprises
PFCE - Private Final Consumption
MSP - Minimum Support Price
Expenditure
MTDR - Median Term Deposit Rate
PIB - Press Information Bureau
NBFCs - Non-Banking Financial Companies
PMG - Pooled Mean Group
NCAER - National Council of Applied
PMGKAY - Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna
Economic Research
Yojana
NDS - Negotiated Dealing System
PMI - Purchasing Managers’ Index
NDTL - Net Demand and Time Liabilities
POL - Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants
NEER - Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
POSOCO - Power System Operation
NPA - Non-Performing Asset Corporation Limited
NSC - National Savings Certificate PPAC - Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell
NSDL - National Securities Depository PRN - Production Weighted Rainfall Index
Limited PSB - Public Sector Bank
NSO - National Statistical Office PSU - Public Sector Undertaking
NSSO - National Sample Survey Office PvB - Private Sector Bank
ODOP - One District One Product Q1 - First Quarter
vv
Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Q2 - Second Quarter SWM - South-west Monsoon
Q3 - Third Quarter TBs - Treasury Bill
Q4 - Fourth Quarter TREPS - Tri-party Repo Dealing System
q-o-q - Quarter-on-Quarter TRQ - Tariff Rate Quota
QPM - Quarterly Projection Model
UK - United Kingdom
RBI - Reserve Bank of India
UNCTAD - United Nations Conference on Trade
RD - Revenue Deficit and Development
RE - Revised Estimates US - United States
RECO - Revenue Expenditure to Capital US$ - US dollar
Outlay
USA - United States of America
REER - Real Effective Exchange Rate
VAR - Vector Autoregression
RHS - Right Hand Side
VAT - Value Added Tax
RL - Rural Labourers
VRR - Variable Rate Repo
RoW - Rest of the World
VRRR - Variable Rate Reverse Repo
S&P - Standard and Poor
WAC - Weighted Average Coupon
SAAR - Seasonally Adjusted Annualised Rate
WACR - Weighted Average Call Money Rate
SCB - Scheduled Commercial Bank
WADR - Weighted Average Discount Rate
SDF - Standing Deposit Facility
WADTDR - Weighted Average Domestic Term
SEBI - Securities and Exchange Board of
Deposit Rate
India
WALR - Weighted Average Lending Rate
SGS - State Government Securities
WAM - Weighted Average Maturity
SIAM - Society of Indian Automobile
Manufacturers WAR - Weighted Average Rate
SIBC - Sector-wise and Industry-wise Bank
WEO - World Economic Outlook
Credit
WMA - Ways and Means Advances
SLR - Statutory Liquidity Ratio
WPI - Wholesale Price Index
SSE - Shanghai Stock Exchange
WTO - World Trade Organization
SSI - Small Savings Instruments
y-o-y - Year-on-Year
STR - Short Term Repo
YTD - Year to Date
STU - Stocks-to-Use
vvii
I. Macroeconomic Outlook
Aggregate supply conditions are improving. This augurs well for demand ahead of the festival season. Consumer
price inflation is ruling above the upper threshold around the target. Monetary policy has moved into the withdrawal
of accommodation mode and remains focussed to ensure that inflation returns to the target while supporting growth.
The daunting global environment imparts considerable uncertainty to the outlook.
I.1 Key Developments since the April 2022 MPR sharply by 21 per cent and 18 per cent, respectively,
since end-March (upto September 27, 2022) amidst
Since the release of the April 2022 Monetary Policy
high volatility. In currency markets, the US dollar has
Report (MPR), the global economic environment
strengthened to a 20-year high while all other major
has been marked by slowing growth with rising
currencies have depreciated.
risks of recession, elevated inflationary pressures,
and tightening financial conditions engendered by Turning to the domestic economy, real gross
aggressive and synchronised monetary policy actions domestic product (GDP) rose by 13.5 per cent (y-o-y)
and stances. For emerging market economies (EMEs), in Q1: 2022-23, driven by base effects, even as
these developments have translated into currency momentum slipped due to the drag from net exports
depreciations brought on by a surging US dollar and and restrained government spending. Aggregate
capital outflows, leading to reserve losses. The conflict supply conditions have been steadily improving and
in Ukraine lingers on and the pandemic continues this augurs well for demand, both urban and rural,
to weigh on economic activity even as issues in ahead of the festival season. The late pick-up in
green transition, real and financial fragmentation, south-west monsoon and the recent spread of it to
trade restrictions and reshoring pose formidable deficient regions is enabling a catch-up in kharif
challenges to the global economy. Financial markets sowing, though paddy and pulses remain undersown
remain volatile and global spillovers pose significant relative to a year ago. Manufacturing is steadily
headwinds. gaining strength and services are posting strong
growth, led by contact-sensitive sectors.
Brent crude prices remain at elevated levels, given
the tight demand-supply balance, despite recent Inflationary pressures, however, persisted at elevated
correction. Global food prices have declined by 14 per levels during H1:2022-23 and remain a key policy
cent from an all-time high in March but are ruling 8 per concern. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation has
cent over last year’s level1. The Bloomberg commodity been at or above the upper tolerance threshold of 6
index was 10 per cent higher on September 27 per cent since January 2022, driven by adverse supply
(year-on-year (y-o-y) basis), notwithstanding some shocks emanating from geopolitical tensions. While
easing since June. Sovereign bond yields have inflation has eased from its April peak of 7.8 per
hardened and reached multi-year highs in major cent, it remains at unacceptably high levels. In order
advanced economies (AEs) as investors brace for to anchor inflationary expectations and contain the
the future course of monetary policy across the second round effects, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
world. Yield curves have inverted, foretelling future narrowed the policy corridor in April and the Monetary
recession. Equity markets in AEs and EMEs corrected Policy Committee (MPC) increased the policy repo
1 Based on Food and Agriculture Organisation’s (FAO’s) food price index for August 2022.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
rate by 140 basis points (bps) during May-August. With the CPI inflation print of March 2022 rising
Monetary policy remains focussed on withdrawal of sharply to 7 per cent and significant upside risks
accommodation. to the near-term trajectory from higher food, crude
oil and commodity prices materialising due to
Monetary Policy Committee: April-September 2022
geopolitical tensions and sanctions, the MPC decided
During April-September 2022, the MPC met four times,
to hold an off-cycle meeting in May 2022. It noted
including an off-cycle meeting in May 2022. At the time
that while economic activity was resilient, inflation
of the MPC meeting in April 2022, the global economic
at elevated levels warranted resolute and calibrated
and financial environment had turned challenging due
steps to anchor inflation expectations and contain
to the sharp jump in international commodity prices
second round effects. The MPC voted unanimously to
and uncertainties around the pace of monetary policy
increase the policy repo rate by 40 bps and reiterated
normalisation globally. CPI inflation was at or above
the stance as set out in the April resolution.
the upper threshold of 6 per cent for two successive
By the June 2022 MPC meeting, CPI inflation had
months in January and February 2022. The MPC
risen further to 7.8 per cent in the April 2022 print,
assessed that the ratcheting up of geopolitical tensions,
with considerable uncertainty around the outlook on
the generalised hardening of global commodity prices,
account of the geopolitical situation. The MPC was
the likelihood of prolonged supply chain disruptions,
of the view that continued shocks to food inflation,
dislocations in trade and capital flows, divergent
elevated international crude oil prices and pending
monetary policy responses and volatility in global
pass-through of input costs to selling prices were
financial markets posed sizeable upside risks to the
likely to sustain pressures on headline inflation.
inflation trajectory and downside risks to domestic
Accordingly, the inflation forecast for 2022-23 was
growth. Accordingly, the inflation forecast for 2022-23
revised upwards by 100 bps from the April meeting
was raised by 120 bps (relative to the February 2022
to 6.7 per cent. Against this backdrop, the MPC judged
projections) to 5.7 per cent while the real GDP growth
that there was a need for calibrated monetary policy
forecast was revised downward by 60 bps to 7.2 per
action to keep inflation expectations anchored and
cent. Faced with the twin challenge of high inflation
restrain the broadening of price pressures. Accordingly,
and worsening growth outlook, the MPC decided to
it unanimously decided to increase the policy repo
keep the policy repo rate unchanged at 4 per cent.
rate by 50 bps. The MPC focused the stance of policy
Although still accommodative, the stance of monetary
on withdrawal of accommodation.
policy focused on withdrawal of accommodation to
ensure that inflation remains within the target going At the time of the MPC’s August 2022 meeting, CPI
forward, while supporting growth. Concomitantly, the inflation had eased to 7 per cent during May-June
Reserve Bank introduced the standing deposit facility 2022 from 7.8 per cent in April but remained above
(SDF) at 40 bps above the fixed rate reverse repo rate the upper tolerance threshold of 6 per cent. The MPC
as the floor of the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) observed that while there was some let up in global
corridor, thus making the corridor symmetrical with commodity prices, spillovers from geopolitical shocks
a width of +/- 25 bps around the policy repo rate were imparting considerable uncertainty to the
(see Chapter IV).2 inflation trajectory. Domestic economic activity was
2 To manage the excess liquidity effectively during the pandemic phase, the LAF corridor was made asymmetric during March-April 2020, with reverse
repo rate at 65 bps below the repo rate (25 bps prior to the pandemic) and the marginal standing facility (MSF) rate at 25 bps above the repo rate.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
seen as resilient. With inflation projected to remain
Table I.2: Baseline Assumptions for Projections
above the upper tolerance level of 6 per cent through
Indicator MPR April 2022 MPR September 2022
the first three quarters of 2022-23, entailing the risk
of destabilising inflation expectations and triggering Crude Oil US$ 100 per barrel US$ 100 per barrel during
(Indian basket) during 2022-23 H2:2022-23
second round effects, the MPC was of the view that
Exchange rate ` 76/US$ during 2022-23 ` 80/US$ during H2:2022-23
further calibrated monetary policy action was needed
Monsoon Normal for 2022-23 7 per cent above long period
to contain inflationary pressures, pull back headline
average for 2022-23#
inflation within the tolerance band closer to the target,
Global growth 3.5 per cent in 2022 3.2 per cent in 2022
and keep inflation expectations anchored to ensure 3.5 per cent in 2023 2.9 per cent in 2023
sustained growth. Accordingly, the MPC unanimously Fiscal deficit To remain within To remain within
(per cent of GDP) BE 2022-23 BE 2022-23
decided to increase the repo rate by 50 basis points
Centre: 6.4 Centre: 6.4
and maintained its stance of June 2022 with a majority Combined: 9.0 Combined: 9.3
of 5 to 1. Domestic No major change No major change
macroeconomic/
The MPC’s voting pattern reflects the diversity in structural policies
during the
individual members’ assessments, expectations and forecast period
policy preferences, a characteristic also reflected in
#: as on September 29, 2022.
voting patterns of other central banks (Table I.1). Notes: 1. The Indian basket of crude oil represents a derived numeraire
comprising sour grade (Oman and Dubai average) and sweet grade
(Brent) crude oil.
Macroeconomic Outlook
2. The exchange rate path assumed here is for the purpose of
generating the baseline projections and does not indicate any
Chapters II and III analyse macroeconomic
‘view’ on the level of the exchange rate. The Reserve Bank is
developments related to inflation and economic guided by the objective of containing excess volatility in the
foreign exchange market and not by any specific level of and/or
activity during H1:2022-23 (April-September). The band around the exchange rate.
3. BE: Budget estimates.
4. Combined fiscal deficit refers to that of the Centre and States
taken together.
Table I.1: Monetary Policy Committees and
Sources: RBI estimates; Budget documents; and IMF.
Policy Rate Voting Patterns
Country Policy Meetings: April-September 2022 evolution of key macroeconomic and financial
Total Meetings Meetings Variation variables over the past six months warrants revisions
meetings with full without in policy
in the baseline assumptions (Table I.2).
consensus full rate (basis
consensus points)
First, international crude oil prices have exhibited
Brazil 4 3 1 200
large volatility in H1. Brent crude oil prices hardened
Chile 4 3 1 375
Colombia 3 1 2 400 to US$ 121 per barrel by mid-June, driven by supply
Czech Republic 3 0 3 200 concerns due to sanctions on Russia. Prices have
Hungary 6 6 0 735
cooled off since then, as global demand is weakening.
India 4 4 0 140
Continued supply management by the Organization
Israel 4 4 0 190
Japan 4 1 3 0 of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) plus and
South Africa 3 0 3 200 gas-to-oil switching due to record natural gas prices
Sweden 3 3 0 175
have supported crude oil prices while the geopolitical
Thailand 3 1 2 50
conflict and sanctions weigh heavily on the outlook
UK 4 0 4 150
US 4 3 1 275 (Chart I.1.a & Chart I.1.b). Taking into account these
Sources: Central bank websites. developments, crude prices (Indian basket) are

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart I.1: Crude Oil Prices
a: Brent Prices b: World Oil Production, Consumption and
Change in Stock
Sources: Bloomberg; and US Energy Information Administration (EIA).
assumed at US$ 100 per barrel in the baseline, same
Chart I.2: Global GDP and Inflation
as in the April MPR baseline.
Second, the INR exhibited a depreciating bias vis-à-
vis the US dollar during H1 on the back of generalised
strengthening of the US dollar against currencies,
elevated crude oil prices and portfolio outflows. The
US dollar index strengthened by 16 per cent between
end-March 2022 and September 27, reflecting
aggressive monetary policy tightening by the US
Fed and expectations of future hikes. Taking these
developments into consideration, the exchange rate
is assumed at INR 80 per US dollar in the baseline as
against INR 76 in the April 2022 MPR, a depreciation
of 5 per cent.
Source: IMF.
Third, global economic prospects have weakened
significantly since the April MPR, due to multi- fell into contraction zone in August 2022 for the first
pronged headwinds discussed earlier (Chart I.2). time since June 2020. Global factors exert downward
Global trade is slowing down and there are increasing pressures on domestic activity and upward pressures
concerns of recessions in major economies. The on domestic inflation through a variety of channels
global composite Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) (Box I.1).

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Box I.1: Macroeconomic Implications of Low Global Growth and High Global Inflation
Global growth is expected to slow down from 6.1 per cent demand. Third, higher global inflation and global interest
in 2021 to 3.2 per cent in 2022 and the outlook is “gloomy rates impact capital flows, put downward pressures on the
and more uncertain”, with risks tilted to the downside domestic currency and lead to higher imported inflation.
(IMF, 2022). Global consumer price inflation is projected
Based on the ‘Rest of the World (RoW) Block’ of the RBI’s
by the IMF to increase from 4.7 per cent in 2021 to 8.3 per
Quarterly Projection Model3, the peak impact on India’s
cent in 2022.
inflation and growth through all the channels occurs by
These global stagflationary impulses can impact domestic four quarters. Second-round effects can keep inflation
growth and inflation through multiple channels. First, at elevated levels even beyond 8 quarters, necessitating
lower external demand drags down export demand and appropriate monetary policy actions to anchor inflation
overall domestic demand and growth. At the same time, expectations (Chart I.1.1). In such circumstances,
weak global demand can soften global commodity prices. frontloaded monetary policy actions by showing a strong
Second, higher global commodity prices increase domestic commitment to the inflation target add to credibility gains
inflation through direct and cost-push channels and and help in reining in inflation with lower output losses
dampen domestic growth through weakening of aggregate (John, Kumar and Patra, 2022).
Chart I.1.1: Global Shocks and Domestic GDP Growth and Inflation
a: Growth Impact b: Inflation Impact
Source: RBI staff estimates.
References:
Benes, J., K. Clinton, A. George, P. Gupta, J. John, O. Kamenik, D. Laxton, P. Mitra, G. Nadhanael, R. Portillo, H. Wang, and
F. Zhang (2016), “Quarterly Projection Model for India: Key Elements and Properties”, RBI Working Paper Series No. 08.
International Monetary Fund (2022), World Economic Outlook, July.
John, J., D. Kumar, and M. D. Patra (2022), “Monetary Policy: Confronting Supply-driven Inflation”, RBI Bulletin July,
Volume LXXVI (7), pp. 97-109.
3 The QPM belongs to the genre of consensus macroeconomic new Keynesian open economy structural models and is calibrated to incorporate the India-
specific characteristics (Benes et al., 2016).

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
I.2 The Outlook for Inflation
Chart I.3: Inflation Expectations of Households
CPI inflation has ruled at or above the upper tolerance
threshold of 6 per cent since January 2022 albeit
with some moderation in recent months (Chapter II).
Looking ahead, the three months and one year ahead
median inflation expectations of urban households
increased by 50 bps each in the September 2022 round
of the Reserve Bank’s survey compared to the previous
round4. The proportion of respondents expecting
the general price level to increase by more than the
current rate also increased in both the three months
and one year ahead horizons vis-à-vis the previous
round (Chart I.3).
Manufacturing firms polled in the July-September
2022 round of the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook Source: Inflation Expectations Survey of Households, RBI.
survey expected reduction in cost of raw materials
as well as selling prices in Q3:2022-23 (Chart I.4a).5 in manufacturing and services PMI reported increase
Services and infrastructure sector companies also in input and output prices in August 2022, although
expected softening in input costs and selling prices with some moderation in the pace of inflationary
in Q3:2022-23 (Charts I.4b and I.4c).6 The respondents pressures.
Chart I.4: Expectations for Cost of Raw Materials/Inputs and Selling Prices
a: Manufacturing Firms b: Services Firms c: Infrastructure Firms
Source: Industrial Outlook Survey, RBI. Source: Services and Infrastructure Outlook Survey, RBI. Source: Services and Infrastructure Outlook Survey, RBI.
Note: Net response is the difference between the share of respondents reporting optimism and those reporting pessimism. The range is -100 to 100. A positive/ negative
value of net response is considered as optimistic/pessimistic from the view point of respondent firms. Therefore, higher positive values of selling prices indicate increase
in output prices while lower values for the cost of raw materials/cost of inputs indicate higher input price pressures and vice versa.
4 The Reserve Bank’s inflation expectations survey of households is being conducted in 19 cities since March 2021 (18 cities in the previous rounds) and
the results of the September 2022 round are based on responses from 6,052 households.
5 The results of the July-September 2022 round of the industrial outlook survey are based on responses from 1,234 companies.
6 Based on 469 services and 124 infrastructure companies polled in the July-September 2022 round of the services and infrastructure outlook survey.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Professional forecasters surveyed by the Reserve Bank
Table I.3: Projections - Reserve Bank and
in September 2022 expected CPI inflation to soften Professional Forecasters
from 7.3 per cent in Q1:2022-23, to 6.0 per cent in Q4, (Per cent)
and 4.9-5.0 per cent in H1:2023-24 (Chart I.5a and Table 2022-23 2023-24
I.3).7 Long-run inflation expectations of professional Reserve Bank’s Baseline Projections
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 5.8 5.2
forecasters – measured by their 5- and 10-year ahead
Real GDP growth 7.0 6.5
expectations – remained broadly aligned around
Median Projections of Professional Forecasters
the inflation target, albeit with a slight upward drift
Inflation, Q4 (y-o-y) 6.0 5.0@
during the pandemic period. In the September round, Real GDP growth 7.0 6.1
Gross domestic saving (per cent of GNDI) 28.0 28.7
the 5-year ahead expected inflation rose by 10 bps
Gross capital formation (per cent of GDP) 31.3 31.5
to 5.0 per cent while the 10-year ahead expectation Credit growth of scheduled commercial banks 13.0 11.0
remained unchanged at 4.5 per cent (Chart I.5b). Combined gross fiscal deficit (per cent of GDP) 9.7 9.0
Central government gross fiscal deficit (per cent of 6.4 6.0
GDP)
Looking ahead, several exogenous factors – global
Repo rate (end-period) 6.00 6.00@
and domestic – will impinge on the inflation outlook.
Yield on 91-days treasury bills (end-period) 6.2 6.0
Global commodity prices have come off their highs Yield on 10-year central government securities 7.5 7.4
(end-period)
on weaker global prospects but remain elevated
Overall balance of payments (US$ billion) -57.6 -7.4
and volatile. Global supply chains are gradually Merchandise exports growth 7.2 6.3
Merchandise imports growth 19.0 5.7
normalising, although they remain vulnerable
Current account balance (per cent of GDP) -3.4 -2.7
to geopolitical disturbances, pandemic-related
@: Q2:2023-24
lockdowns in major production hubs, and financial Note: GNDI: Gross National Disposable Income.
Sources: RBI staff estimates; and Survey of Professional Forecasters
market volatility. Domestically, the record foodgrains (September 2022).
Chart I.5: Inflation Expectations of Professional Forecasters
a: CPI Inflation Expectations: Short-run* b: CPI Inflation Expectations: Long-run
*: Five quarters ahead expectations in September 2022.
Sources: Survey of Professional Forecasters, RBI; and National Statistical Office.
7 41 panellists participated in the September 2022 round of the Reserve Bank’s survey of professional forecasters.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
production in 2021-22, the above normal south-
Chart I.6: Projection of CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
west monsoon during 2022, the recovery in kharif
sowing, ample buffer stocks and improved reservoir
position augur well for agricultural prospects and
the future trajectory of food inflation. Taking into
account the initial conditions, signals from forward-
looking surveys and estimates from structural and
other time-series models, CPI inflation is projected to
average 6.7 per cent in 2022-23 – 7.1 per cent in Q2,
6.5 per cent in Q3 and 5.8 per cent in Q4, with risks
evenly balanced (Chart I.6). The 50 per cent and the
70 per cent confidence intervals for headline inflation
Note: The fan chart depicts uncertainty around the baseline projection
in Q4:2022-23 are 4.7-6.9 per cent and 4.0-7.6 per path. The baseline projections are conditioned upon the assumptions set out in
Table I.2. The thick red shaded area represents 50 per cent confidence interval,
cent, respectively. For 2023-24, assuming a normal implying that there is 50 per cent probability that the actual outcome will be
within the range given by the thick red shaded area. Likewise, for 70 per cent and
monsoon, a progressive normalisation of supply 90 per cent confidence intervals, there is 70 per cent and 90 per cent probability,
respectively, that the actual outcomes will be in the range represented by the
chains, and no further exogenous or policy shocks, respective shaded areas.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
structural model estimates indicate that inflation will
average 5.2 per cent. In Q4:2023-24, CPI inflation is
chain disruptions with shocks getting transmitted
projected at 5.2 per cent, with the 50 per cent and the
through highly integrated global supply chains
70 per cent confidence intervals at 3.5-7.0 per cent
(Box I.2), shortfall in kharif production, unseasonal
and 2.5-7.9 per cent, respectively.
rainfall and larger pass-through of input cost pressures
The baseline forecasts are subject to several upside to output prices as demand strengthens. The
and downside risks. The upside risks emanate from downside risks could arise from an early resolution
a further ratcheting up of geopolitical tensions, of geopolitical tensions, further correction in global
higher global crude and commodity prices, escalation commodity prices due to slowing global demand,
in global financial market volatility due to aggressive and further improvement in supply conditions with
monetary policy actions, longer-than-expected supply the ebbing of the pandemic.
Box I.2: Global Cost-Push Spillovers on Inflation: Insights from World Input-Output Tables
The global surge in inflation draws its origins from two Indian economy can be captured through Inter-Country
large adverse shocks in quick succession – the COVID–19 Input-Output (ICIO) tables (OECD, 2021). The potential
pandemic and the conflict in Ukraine – reinforced by impact of country-specific sectoral shocks is estimated
demand pressures emanating from sizeable monetary- by using the Leontief Inverse Matrix to identify the
fiscal stimuli. With more integrated global value chains, countries and sectors that can pose highest cost-push
sectoral and country-specific shocks now transmit more inflationary risks.
swiftly than ever before (de Soyres and Franco, 2020)8.
The cost-push inflationary impact of global shocks on the (Contd.)
8 Intermediate goods accounted for almost half of all global trade, with trade comprising about 30 per cent of world output in 2021 (United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, 2022).

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
aggregated by using CPI weights ( ). is the spillover
; ; ;
from the jth country and is the spillover from the kth
sector.
;
The empirical analysis indicates that a global inflation
L is the Leontief inverse, I is an identity matrix and A is
shock of one percentage point - modelled as a
the technical coefficient matrix derived from ICIO, with
simultaneous one per cent increase in prices across all
dimensions (J*K x J*K) – J and K are the total number
the countries and sectors – could increase inflation in
of economies (71) and industries (45), respectively. SHK
India by around 63 bps through second round effects
is the shock vector modelled as a unit shock (one per comprising domestic indirect effects (46 bps) and global
cent), adjusted for the relative share of the shock size spillovers (17 bps)9, in addition to the direct impact of 100
of the sector and country of origin in the global shock. bps (Chart I.2.1). Domestic sources of inflation (direct as
is a (J x K) domestic CPI inflation response matrix well as indirect) mainly stem from agriculture and allied
Chart I.2.1: Global Supply Shocks: Impact on Inflation
a: Response of Inflation to 1 Per cent Global Supply Shock b: Domestic Sources of Inflation: Sectors
c: Global Spillovers on Inflation: Source Sectors d: Global Spillovers on Inflation: Source Countries
Source: RBI staff estimates using OECD ICIO.
(Contd.)
9 These estimates assume the absence of other channels of transmission like exchange rate and inflation expectations and no offsetting macroeconomic
policy actions.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
activities, housing, textiles, and pharmaceutical sectors. on domestic inflation over time through the cost-push
Global spillovers, representing the imported inflation channel.
channel, are driven by price pressures in energy, mining,
References:
chemicals, trade, basic metals and machinery. In terms
de Soyres, F. and S. Franco. (2019), “Inflation Dynamics
of source countries, the most important contributors to
and Global Value Chains”, World Bank Policy Research
inflation in India are oil exporting countries, China and
Working Paper No. 9090.
the United States.
UNCTAD (2022), “The Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The current bout of global inflation is mainly driven
on International Trade”, Key Statistics and Trends in
by the jump in global energy and agricultural product
International Trade 2021, https://unctad.org/system/files/
prices (which rose by almost 40 per cent and 10 per
official-document/ditctab2022d3_en.pdf
cent, respectively, during H2:2021-22). The empirical
analysis suggests that the global food and energy shocks OECD (2021), Inter-Country Input-Output Tables,
experienced during H2:2021-22 could ceteris paribus available at https://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/inter-country-
impart upward pressure of around 2.5 percentage points input-outputtables.htm
I.3 The Outlook for Growth though overall confidence remained in the
pessimistic zone. Households remained optimistic
Ebbing COVID-19 infections and improving consumer
for the year ahead, with the future expectations
sentiment facilitated a rebound in demand for
index remaining unchanged vis-à-vis the July 2022
contact-intensive services and supported domestic
survey round (Chart I.7).10
demand in H1:2022-23. Industry and services
sectors are holding up well and kharif sowing has
seen a smart recovery. The above-normal south- Chart I.7: Consumer Confidence
west monsoon has improved reservoir levels which
bodes well for the winter crops. Investment activity
is expected to benefit from the government’s
capex push, growth in bank credit, improving
demand conditions and rising capacity utilisation.
Geopolitical tensions, the upsurge in global
financial market volatility and tightening global
financial conditions, however, weigh heavily on the
outlook.
Turning to the key messages from forward-looking
surveys, consumer confidence (the current situation
index) increased further in the September 2022
survey round on account of improved perception
Source: Consumer Confidence Survey, RBI.
on general economic situation and overall spending,
10 The Reserve Bank’s consumer confidence survey is being conducted in 19 cities since March 2021 (13 cities in the previous rounds) and the results of
the September 2022 round are based on responses from 6,062 respondents.

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Chart I.8: Business Assessment and Expectations
a: Manufacturing Firms b: Services Firms c: Infrastructure Firms
Source: Industrial Outlook Survey, RBI. Source: Services and Infrastructure Outlook Survey, RBI. Source: Services and Infrastructure Outlook Survey, RBI.
Optimism on demand conditions in the broadly balanced around this baseline path (Chart
manufacturing sector for the quarter ahead waned I.10 and Table I.3). For 2023-24, assuming a normal
marginally in the July-September 2022 round of the monsoon, and no major exogenous or policy shocks,
Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook survey, though the structural model estimates indicate real GDP
it remained well in the expansion zone (Chart growth at 6.5 per cent.
I.8a). Services sector companies expected slight
There are upside and downside risks to the baseline
moderation while infrastructure companies expected
growth path. Upside risks to the baseline trajectory
a minor uptick in Q3:2022-23 in terms of the overall
business situation (Charts I.8b and I.8c).
Table I.4: Business Expectations Surveys
Recent surveys by other agencies indicate a dip in
Item NCAER FICCI Dun and CII
business expectations over their respective previous
Business Overall Bradstreet Business
rounds (Table I.4). In the August 2022 round of the
Confidence Business Composite Confidence
PMI survey, business expectations of manufacturing Index (July Confidence Business Index
2022) Index Optimism (September
and services firms improved to multi-year highs on
(August Index 2022)
optimism over strengthening demand.
2022) (September
2022)
Professional forecasters polled in the September 2022
Current level of 138.5 65.0 69.9 62.2
round of the Reserve Bank’s survey expected real GDP
the index
growth at 6.3 per cent in Q2:2022-23, 4.8 per cent in Index as per the 142.9 67.6 96.6 66.9
previous survey
Q3 and 4.2 per cent in Q4, and at 6.4-6.6 per cent in
% change (q-o-q) -3.1 -3.8 -27.6 -7.0
H1:2023-24 (Chart I.9 and Table I.3). sequential
% change (y-o-y) 124.1 -8.8 -5.8 -0.6
Taking into account the baseline assumptions, survey
Notes: 1. NCAER: National Council of Applied Economic Research.
indicators and model forecasts, real GDP growth is
2. FICCI: Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry.
expected at 7.0 per cent in 2022-23 – 6.3 per cent in 3. CII: Confederation of Indian Industry.
Sources: NCAER; FICCI; CII; and Dun & Bradstreet Information Services
Q2; and 4.6 per cent each in Q3 and Q4 – with risks India Pvt. Ltd.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart I.9: Professional Forecasters' Projection of Chart I.10: Quarterly Projection of Real GDP
Real GDP Growth Growth (y-o-y)
Note: The fan chart depicts uncertainty around the baseline projection
path. The baseline projections are conditioned upon the assumptions set out
in Table I.2. The thick green shaded area represents 50 per cent confidence
interval, implying that there is 50 per cent probability that the actual outcome
will be within the range given by the thick green shaded area. Likewise, for
70 per cent and 90 per cent confidence intervals, there is 70 per cent and 90
per cent probability, respectively, that the actual outcomes will be in the range
represented by the respective shaded areas.
Sources: Survey of Professional Forecasters, RBI; and National Statistical Office. Source: RBI staff estimates.
could emanate from stronger-than-expected alternative scenarios to assess the balance of risks
expansion in demand for contact-intensive services around the baseline projections.
with the receding threat of the pandemic and festival
(i) Global Growth Uncertainties
spending; a boost to private investment activity from
The downside risks to global growth flagged in
government’s capex push, improving bank credit,
the April 2022 MPR have materialised. Headwinds
rising capacity utilisation, and healthier corporate
from the war, elevated commodity prices, tightening
balance sheets; and a favourable terms of trade
financial conditions, capital outflows from
shock in the case of a sharp correction in crude and
emerging economies, and the slowing global
commodity prices. On the contrary, an escalation
activities could pull global growth further below the
in geopolitical tensions, further hardening of
baseline. There are growing concerns of recession in
international crude oil and other commodity prices,
major economies and the global outlook is bleak and
sustained disruptions to supply chains, the upsurge
risks are tilted to the downside. In such a scenario,
in global financial market volatility, and a sharper
if global growth is 100 bps below the baseline,
loss of momentum in global trade and demand pose
domestic growth and inflation could be around 40
downside risks to the baseline growth path.
bps and 20 bps, respectively, below the baseline
I.4 Balance of Risks
trajectories. Conversely, if there is an early de-
Baseline projections of inflation and growth are escalation in geopolitical tensions, the recent trend
conditional on assumptions of the future course of key in falling commodity prices continues, and global
domestic and international macroeconomic variables inflation ebbs faster than expected, there can be a
set out in Table I.2. There are, however, sizeable fillip to global growth. In this scenario, assuming
uncertainties around the baseline assumptions, that global growth surprises by 50 bps on the upside,
as stated earlier. This section explores plausible domestic growth and inflation could edge higher by

Chapter I Macroeconomic Outlook
Chart 1.11: Impact of Risk Scenarios on the Baseline Inflation Path
a: Crude Oil Prices and Global Demand Shocks b: Exchange Rate and Food Price Shocks
Source: RBI staff estimates.
around 20 bps and 10 bps, respectively (Charts I.11a (iii) Exchange Rate
and I.12a).
The INR depreciated in H1, driven by the generalised
(ii) International Crude Oil Prices strengthening of the US dollar, higher crude oil prices
and sales by foreign portfolio investors. Volatility in
Global crude oil prices remain at elevated levels,
global financial markets is expected to persist due to
driven by geopolitical tensions, sanctions and supply
the uncertainty around monetary policy normalisation
management by OPEC plus. Further production
in the US and other major advanced economies, which
curtailment by OPEC plus and the spike in the
could put downward pressure on the INR. Should
seasonal winter demand for energy amidst high
the INR depreciate by 5 per cent from the baseline,
natural gas prices could harden international crude oil
inflation could edge up by around 20 bps while GDP
prices. Assuming crude oil prices (Indian basket) to be
growth could be higher by around 15 bps through
10 per cent above the baseline of US$ 100 per barrel,
boost to exports. On the other hand, given India’s
domestic inflation and growth could be higher by 30
relatively better growth performance and outlook
bps and weaker by around 20 bps, respectively, over
and strong domestic macroeconomic fundamentals,
the baseline. Conversely, crude oil prices could soften
portfolio equity flows turned significantly positive
below the baseline owing to global demand losing
in August 2022 and could increase further. In this
momentum and an easing of geopolitical tensions. As
scenario, if the INR appreciates by 5 per cent relative
a result, if the Indian basket of crude prices falls by 10
to the baseline, inflation and GDP growth could
per cent relative to the baseline, inflation could ease
moderate by around 20 bps and 15 bps, respectively
by around 30 bps with a boost of 20 bps to growth
(Charts I.11b and I.12b).
(Charts I.11a and I.12a).

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart 1.12: Impact of Risk Scenarios on the Baseline Growth Path
a: Crude Oil Prices and Global Demand Shocks b: Exchange Rate and Food Price Shocks
Source: RBI staff estimates.
(iv) Food Inflation food prices and headline inflation could be around
50 bps above the baseline (Charts I.11b and I.12b).
Food inflation remained high during H1, driven by
I.5 Conclusion
the war-induced jump in global food prices. Global
food prices have started correcting and these are The Indian economy is advancing steadily, and is
being reflected in the softening of domestic edible expected to be one of the fastest growing major
oil prices. Furthermore, kharif sowing has caught economies in 2022. The above-normal south-west
up with its long-term average. Reservoir levels are monsoon, improved reservoir position, government’s
above last year’s and the decadal average, which capex push, improvement in capacity utilisation, a
augur well for the rabi crop. Although the area under broad-based revival in credit growth, strong corporate
paddy sowing has been lower than a year ago due and bank balance sheets, upbeat consumer and
to uneven distribution of south-west monsoon business confidence and receding threat of the
rainfall, ample buffer stocks of rice and effective pandemic are all factors likely to provide impetus to
supply management measures could soften food growth. While inflation has eased somewhat from the
inflation more than anticipated, and push headline April high, supported by some correction in global
inflation 50 bps below the baseline. Conversely, prices, it has ruled above the upper tolerance threshold
global food prices could harden in view of the fragile around the target since January 2022. Monetary policy
geopolitical outlook and sustained input price has moved into the withdrawal of accommodation
pressures on critical inputs like energy and fertilisers. mode and remains focussed to ensure that inflation
Furthermore, unseasonal heavy rainfalls during the returns to the target while supporting growth. The
harvesting period could impact the domestic crop. In daunting global environment, however, imparts
such a scenario, there could be upward pressures on considerable uncertainty to the outlook.

II. Prices and Costs
The trajectory of consumer price index (CPI) inflation since February 2022 has been altered by spillovers
from the conflict in Ukraine. CPI inflation peaked in April 2022 and has since then moderated
but persists above the pre-war levels and also above the upper tolerance band. During H1:2022-23, industrial
and farm input pressures remained firm, notwithstanding some softening. Nominal rural wage growth
was muted.
Since February 2022, the trajectory of headline CPI bottlenecks, sanctions and second-round effects.
inflation1 has been altered by spillovers from adverse Global financial market volatility engendered by
global commodity price shocks triggered by the aggressive monetary tightening and consequent
conflict in Ukraine. In February, it was anticipated spillovers to domestic financial markets exacerbated
that the pandemic-induced global supply chain inflationary pressures.
disruptions would ease with the ebbing of COVID-19
Headline CPI inflation was already testing the upper
infections, the combination of domestic supply side tolerance threshold of 6 per cent during January-
measures and a normal monsoon would bring about February 2022, due to adverse base effects, and a
a durable softening of domestic inflation over the sticky core component.2 Starting March, the fallout
course of the year. The war upended this narrative of the adverse global commodity price shocks spread
with a broad-based spike in global commodity across items. In April, the heat wave and consequent
prices, the resurgence of supply chain and logistics production losses added to a sharp pick-up in prices.
Chart II.1: CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
Note: The imputed CPI prints for April and May 2020 have been regarded as a break in the CPI series.
Sources: National Statistical Office (NSO); and RBI staff estimates.
1 Headline inflation is measured by year-on-year (y-o-y) changes in the all-India consumer price index (CPI) produced by the National Statistical Office
(NSO).
2 Core CPI, i.e., CPI excluding food and fuel is worked out by eliminating the groups ‘food and beverages’ and ‘fuel and light’ from the headline CPI.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
As a result, headline inflation surged by 173 basis
Chart II.2: CPI Inflation (y-o-y):
points in two months – from 6.1 per cent in February Projection versus Actual
to 7.8 per cent in April across food, fuel and core
components. Judicious supply side interventions
by the government and some softening of global
commodity prices from their peak March 2022 levels
enabled inflation to moderate to 6.7 per cent in July
before it edged up to 7.0 per cent in August on a surge
in food inflation (Chart II.1).
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act enjoins
the RBI to set out deviations of actual inflation
outcomes from projections, if any, and explain the
underlying reasons thereof. The April 2022 MPR
projected inflation at 6.3 per cent for Q1:2022- *: Projections for entire Q2:2022-23 vis-a-vis actual average inflation during
July-August 2022.
23 and 5.8 per cent for Q2. War-induced price Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
pressures as well as domestic supply shocks
turned out to be stronger and more persistent than
anticipated, resulting in actual inflation exceeding also contributed to projection errors, partly offset
projections by around 100 bps each in Q1 and by the cut in excise duties on petrol and diesel in
Q2 (July-August) (Chart II.2). This came about May 2022.
largely from substantial upward surprises in food
II.1 Consumer Prices
inflation.3 The unprecedented increase in global
As explained in the preceding section, the surge
food prices in March led to sharp increases in
in headline inflation in April was sharp and broad-
domestic prices of edible oils, animal-based proteins
through high feed costs, and wheat through export based. Thereafter, a deceleration of the momentum
linkages. At the same time, the adverse impact of the of prices, supported by a large favourable base effect,
intense heat wave caused damage to the rabi wheat brought down inflation to 7.0 per cent in May-June.4
crop, and tomato prices jumped by 158.4 per cent (on The deceleration in momentum in May was located in
a year-on-year basis) in June 2022. Processed food the core component, even as food price momentum
prices also registered increases as higher input costs remained robust. In June, headline momentum
were passed on to selling prices. The depreciation moderated further, across all major groups. In July,
of the Indian rupee from the baseline of `76 per even as headline CPI momentum remained unchanged
US$ to around `79-80 per US$ by August-September at June level, favourable base effect led to a softening
3 The April 2022 MPR had largely accounted for the persistence of international crude prices at elevated levels during 2022-23, with an assumption
of US$ 100 per barrel.
4 A change in CPI y-o-y inflation between any two months is the difference between the current month-on-month (m-o-m) change in the
price index (momentum) and the m-o-m change in the price index 12 months earlier (base effect). For more details, see Box I.1 of the MPR,
September 2014.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.3: CPI Inflation – Momentum and Base Effects
a: CPI Headline b: CPI Food and Beverages
c: CPI Fuel and Light d: CPI excluding Food and Fuel
Note: The y-o-y inflation for April and May 2021 have been calculated based on the imputed index for April and May 2020 released by NSO.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
in inflation by 30 bps to 6.7 per cent. August was the
Chart II.4: Average CPI Inflation (y-o-y)
third successive month with a steady momentum of (Kernel Density Estimates)
0.5 per cent; inflation, however, edged up by around
30 basis points as the favourable base effects waned
(Chart II.3).
The mean of the CPI inflation distribution rose to
6.8 per cent in 2022 (January-August) from 5.3 per
cent during the corresponding period in 2021 and
the pre-COVID average of 3.4 per cent for 2017-19
(January-August). This was accompanied by higher
median rates and lower dispersion in the sub-
group/group-wise distribution of inflation rates
signifying generalisation of inflation (Chart II.4),
and heightened uncertainty about future inflation
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
(Box II.1).

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Box II.1: Inflation and Inflation Uncertainty in India
Sustained high inflation can lead to higher uncertainty volatility) is estimated by employing a generalized
and allocative inefficiency (Friedman, 1977; Ball, 1992). autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH)
The impact of inflation variability can, however, be model. Three specifications are estimated to address the
ambiguous, depending on whether the central bank various hypotheses using GARCH (2,1)5 estimates. Model I
tolerates higher inflation (Cukierman and Meltzer, 1986) is the baseline model; in Model II, inflation rate is added
or it is committed to the inflation target and adopts a to assess the Friedman-Ball hypothesis; in Model III,
contractionary policy (Holland, 1995). uncertainty (i.e., the variance of inflation) is included in
the mean equation to explore the Cukierman–Meltzer/
Using CPI data (month-on-month percentage changes
Holland hypothesis (Table II.1.1).
of seasonally adjusted data) for the period April 2005 to
July 2022, time-varying inflation uncertainty (or inflation The sum of ARCH and GARCH coefficients is in the range
of 0.83 to 0.96 (i.e., less than 1), suggesting that inflation
volatility exhibits high degree of persistence but is mean
Table II.1.1: Inflation and Inflation Volatility:
reverting (Chart II.1.1).
Estimates of GARCH Models
The level of inflation is seen to have a positive impact
Variable Model I Model II Model III
on the variance of inflation (Model II), providing support
Mean Equation
for the Friedman-Ball hypothesis. Inflation volatility is
Constant 0.46*** 0.32*** -0.37***
(0.05) (0.04) (0.14) seen to have a negative impact on the rate of inflation
Inflation (-1) 0.22*** 0.27** 0.25***
in line with the Holland hypothesis (Model III). Granger
(0.06) (0.06) (0.06)
Log(GARCH) - - -0.50*** causality analysis indicates causality running from
(0.07)
inflation to inflation volatility (Table II.1.2). Overall, the
Variance Equation
analysis suggests that high levels of inflation can raise
Constant 0.04 -0.01 0.01*
uncertainty about future inflation and impinge upon
(0.03) (0.01) (0.01)
ARCH(-1) 0.25*** 0.15** 0.47*** inflation expectations, stressing the need for keeping
(0.09) (0.07) (0.10)
inflation around the target.
ARCH(-2) -0.23*** -0.15** -0.45***
(0.08) (0.06) (0.10)
GARCH(-1) 0.83*** 0.82*** 0.94***
(0.18) (0.06) (0.03)
Inflation - 0.09*** - Chart II.1.1: Conditional Standard Deviation of
(0.02) Inflation based on GARCH (2,1)
Diagnostics
ARCH-LM (3) 0.43 1.58 0.46
(0.73) (0.20) (0.71)
ARCH-LM (6) 0.61 0.94 0.82
(0.72) (0.47) (0.55)
Q2(3) 1.41 4.20 1.39
(0.77) (0.24) (0.71)
Q2(6) 3.21 6.01 4.85
(0.78) (0.42) (0.56)
Engle-Ng Sign-Bias Test 2.20 4.34 2.69
(0.53) (0.23) (0.44)
Note: ***, ** and * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10 per cent levels,
respectively. Figures in parentheses indicate standard errors for mean and
variance equations and p-values for the diagnostic tests. Inflation has been
calculated as the seasonally adjusted month-over-month increase in prices.
Note: For April and May 2020, imputed indices released by NSO have been used.
The sample period for the analysis is April 2005-July 2022.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
(Contd.)
5 A conditional least square estimation of the ARMA (1,1) model confirms that there are significant ARCH effects.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Ball, L. (1992), “Why does High Inflation Raise Inflation
Table II.1.2: Causality between Inflation and
Uncertainty?”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 29(3), 371-
Inflation Volatility
388.
Null Hypothesis Lag 3 Lag 6
Cukierman, A., & Meltzer, A. H. (1986), “A Theory of
Inflation does not Granger cause Inflation Volatility 6.75*** 3.54*** Ambiguity, Credibility, and Inflation under Discretion and
Inflation Volatility does not Granger cause Inflation 1.90 1.02 Asymmetric Information”, Econometrica, 54(5), 1099-1128.
Note: *** indicates significance at 1 per cent level. Holland, A. S. (1995), “Inflation and Uncertainty: Tests
Source: RBI staff estimates.
for Temporal Ordering”, Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 27(3), 827-837.
References:
Balaji, B., Durai, S., & Ramachandran, M. (2016). “The
Friedman, M. (1977), “Nobel Lecture: Inflation and Dynamics between Inflation and Inflation Uncertainty:
Unemployment”, Journal of Political Economy, 85(3), 451- Evidence from India”, Journal of Quantitative Economics,
472. 14(1), 1-14.
Diffusion indices (DIs)6 also attest to generalised annualised rate (saar). Though there was some let
price increases across the CPI basket during March- up during May-June, the spread of price increases
April 2022 (Chart II.5a). A majority of the items in the accelerated during July-August. In August, a majority
CPI basket showed threshold DIs7 in excess of 4 per of CPI basket registered prices increases in excess of
cent and 6 per cent, based on a seasonally adjusted 4 per cent (saar) (Chart II.5b).
Chart II.5: CPI Diffusion Indices (M-o-M Seasonally Adjusted)
a: CPI Headline, Goods and Services b: CPI Headline by Thresholds











Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
6 The CPI diffusion index, a measure of dispersion of price changes, categorises items in the CPI basket according to whether their prices have risen,
remained stagnant or fallen over the previous month. The higher the reading is above 50 for the diffusion index, the broader is the expansion or
generalisation of price increases; the further is the reading below 50, the broader is the price decline across items.
7 Threshold diffusion indices capture the dispersion of price increases in CPI basket beyond the specified saar thresholds of 4 per cent and 6 per cent.

xednI
02-beF 02-rpA 02-nuJ 02-guA 02-tcO 02-ceD 12-beF 12-rpA 12-nuJ 12-guA 12-tcO 12-ceD 22-beF 22-rpA 22-nuJ 22-guA











CPI Headline CPI goods CPI services
xednI
02-beF 02-rpA 02-nuJ 02-guA 02-tcO 02-ceD 12-beF 12-rpA 12-nuJ 12-guA 12-tcO 12-ceD 22-beF 22-rpA 22-nuJ 22-guA
Morethan4per cent Morethanorequalto 6percent
Monetary Policy Report September 2022
II.2 Drivers of Inflation along with fuel price shocks, while aggregate demand
conditions continued to exert downward pressure on
A historical decomposition of inflation using vector
inflation (Chart II.6a).
autoregression (VAR)8 analysis to ascertain the relative
role of various macro factors indicates that the rise During March-August 2022, goods inflation
in inflation during H1:2022-23 can be primarily contributed 86 per cent of headline inflation.
attributed to adverse supply-side shocks from food Perishables (non-durable goods with a 7-day
Chart II.6: Drivers of CPI Inflation
a: Decomposition of CPI Inflation*
* Deviation from deterministic trend.
Note: Estimated using a vector autoregression (see footnote 8 for details).
Sources: NSO; RBI; Petroleum Planning & Analysis Cell (PPAC); BSE; Labour Bureau; and RBI staff estimates.
b: Contribution of Goods and Services c: Contribution of Imported Inflation
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates
8 Historical decomposition estimates the contribution of each shock to the movements in inflation over the sample period (Q4:2010-11 to Q2-2022-23)
based on a vector autoregression (VAR) with the following variables (represented as the vector Y) – crude oil prices (US$ per barrel); exchange rate (INR
t
per US$), asset price (BSE Sensex), CPI; the output gap; rural wages; the policy repo rate; and money supply (M). All variables other than policy repo rate

are y-o-y growth rates. The VAR can be written in reduced form as: Y =c + A Y + e; where e represents a vector of shocks. Using Wold decomposition,
t t-1 t t
Y can be represented as a function of its deterministic trend and sum of all the shocks e. This formulation facilitates decomposition of the deviation of
t t
inflation from its deterministic trend into the sum of contributions from various shocks.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
recall9) like milk, tomatoes, potatoes, edible oils, decline in international commodity prices in July-
cooked meals and chicken as well as semi-perishable August 2022 lowered imported inflation. The cut in
goods (non-durable goods with a 30-day recall), central excise duties on petrol and diesel in May 2022
particularly, petroleum products like kerosene, reduced domestically generated inflation (Chart II.6c).
liquified petroleum gas (LPG) and petrol along with
Food
cereals and medicines were the main drivers of goods
Food and beverages (with a weight of 45.9 per cent in
inflation (Char t II.6b). Durable goods contributed
CPI) inflation rose to 8.1 per cent in April 2022, owing to
12.8 per cent of overall inflation. The contribution of
global supply shortages and adverse domestic weather
services (with a weight of 23.4 per cent in overall CPI)
conditions. Thereafter, food inflation eased to 6.7 per
remained muted at around 14 per cent of headline
cent in July, supported by the Government’s supply-
inflation (Chart II.6b).
side measures, some easing of international food
The increase in global commodity prices following prices and a substantial correction in tomato prices.
the conflict in Ukraine contributed to a surge in the In August, food inflation turned around to register a
contribution of imported components10 to headline substantial pick-up, with cereals and vegetables being
inflation during March-June 2022. Subsequently, the its key drivers (Chart II.7a and II.7b).
Chart II.7: CPI Food Inflation
a: Drivers of CPI Food Inflation b: Drivers of CPI Food Momentum
*: Includes meat & fish, egg, milk and pulses.
**: Includes fruits, sugar, non-alcoholic beverages and prepared meals.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI food and beverages.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
9 The CPI weighting diagrams use the modified mixed reference period (MMRP) data based on the 2011-12 Consumer Expenditure Survey conducted by
the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO). Under MMRP, data are collected on expenditures incurred for frequently purchased items – edible oil, eggs,
fish, meat, vegetables, fruits, spices, beverages, processed foods, pan, tobacco and intoxicants – during the last seven days; for clothing, bedding, footwear,
education, medical (institutional), durable goods, during the last 365 days; and for all other food, fuel and light, miscellaneous goods and services
including non-institutional medical services, rents and taxes, data relate to the last 30 days.
10 Global commodities that drive domestic prices include petroleum products; coal; electronic goods; gold; silver; chemical products; metal products;
textiles; cereals; milk products, and vegetables oils – these together have a weight of 36.4 per cent in the CPI basket.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart II.8: Financial Year Price Build-up
(August over March)
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI - food and beverages.
Sources: NSO and RBI staff estimates.
Even as food inflation remained elevated, the food elevated global prices due to the war, higher exports
price build-up in the current financial year (August (157 per cent y-o-y during April-July 2022), and decline
over March) so far was muted relative to historical in stocks (0.9 times the buffer norms as on September
patterns. First, food prices registered a sharp pick-up 1, 2022). In response, restrictions on wheat exports
in March 2022 itself, primarily on account of meat and were imposed since May 2022, and exports of wheat
fish, and edible oils. Second, while the price build-up flour were banned from August 27, 2022. Rice prices
in cereals (which constitutes more than a fifth of the increased due to the substitution of wheat by rice
food basket) was higher than its long-term average as under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana
was those of fruits, spices, prepared meals and
milk, these were offset by a substantial correction Chart II.9: CPI-Cereals and Products
in edible oils, and meat and fish prices from historic (Cumulative Momentum)
highs in May and June. Third, the summer seasonal
increase in vegetable prices was lower than usual
due to a softer build-up in onion, garlic and some
other vegetables prices in view of higher production
(Chart II.8).
Inflation in the prices of cereals (weight of 9.7 per
cent in the CPI and 21.1 per cent in the food and
beverages group) rose from 5.0 per cent in March 2022
to 9.6 per cent in August driven by sharp pick up in
momentum (Chart II.9). Within cereals, wheat prices
have increased sharply since March on account of
lower domestic production ((-) 2.5 per cent in 2021-22)
due to heat waves in major wheat producing states, Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
(PMGKAY) for May-September 2022, higher exports (LMT) in 2022-23). Subsequently, prices rose during
(9.0 per cent y-o-y during April-July 2022), and a fall June-August 2022 in line with the usual seasonal
in area under kharif sowing and expected lower pattern. Potato prices increased during March-August
production. Large stocks of rice (2.6 times the buffer 2022 due to lower production ((-) 4.6 per cent in 2021-
norm as of September 1, 2022) and restrictions on 22). To rein in price pressures, free imports of potatoes
broken rice exports along with imposition of 20 per were allowed from Bhutan until June 30, 2023. Tomato
cent export duty on rice other than basmati and par- prices picked up dramatically during April-June 2022
boiled rice are expected to withhold undue price due to the decline in production ((-) 4.0 per cent in
pressures. 2021-22) coming from lower area sown, heat waves in
north India and excess rains and cyclone in Karnataka.
Vegetable prices (weight of 6.0 per cent in the CPI
The upbeat production response to elevated prices
and 13.2 per cent in the food and beverages group)
led to robust mandi arrivals and the easing of tomato
inflation remained in double digits during March-
prices during July-August 2022.
August 2022, peaking in May. The spike in tomato
prices (113.5 per cent during April-June 2022), along Inflation in prices of fruits (weight of 2.9 per cent in
with price increases in other vegetables reflecting the CPI and 6.3 per cent within the food and beverages
the usual summer uptick, remained the main drivers group) increased from 2.5 per cent in March 2022 to
(Chart II.10). The negative contribution of onions and 7.4 per cent in August due to higher prices of bananas,
garlic, on an average, during April-August partly offset apples, grapes and dry fruits. A spike in mango prices
the inflationary pressures. in April 2022 due to crop damage caused by heat
waves and unseasonal rains also contributed to fruit
Among key vegetables, onion prices moderated during
price momentum.
March-May 2022 on account of higher production
(an increase of 19 per cent in 2021-22) and record Pulses (plant-based protein) price inflation (weight of
procurement (buffer stock of 2.5 lakh metric tonnes 2.4 per cent in the CPI and 5.2 per cent in the food and
Chart II.10: Drivers of Vegetable Inflation (y-o-y)
Notes: Figures in parentheses indicate items' weights in CPI-vegetables. Item level data were not released by NSO for the months of March, April and May 2020.
Source: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart II.11: Pulses Inflation and Stock-Use Ratio: Monthly Balance Sheet
Sources: MOSPI; DGCIS; CACP; Ministry of Agriculture; and RBI staff estimates.
beverages group) moderated from March 2022 until II.12). In the case of meat and fish, prices rose during
June after which it picked up during July-August. Prices March-June 2022, reflecting feed cost pressures
moderated in Q1:2022-23 in line with supply side amidst the early onset of summer, accompanied by
measures by the government, including the extension heat waves. Price pressures eased in July-August
of tur and urad imports under the ‘free category’ 2022 due to reduced seasonal demand (on account
until March 31, 2023; the reduction in Agriculture of Sravana month) and imports of genetically
Infrastructure and Development Cess (AIDC) on modified (GM) soymeal. In contrast, a fall in prices
lentils to 0 per cent from 10 per cent extended till along with favourable base effects dragged eggs price
March 31, 2023; and higher production (8.8 per cent into deflation during April-August 2022. Milk and
in 2021-22). However, inflation in pulses picked up products prices increased consistently during March-
gently during July-August, driven by shortfall in kharif August 2022, as major milk cooperatives (like Amul
sowing and the expected shortfall in production of and Mother Dairy) raised retail prices by `2 per litre
tur and urad. Adverse base effects also contributed to
each in March and August 2022, citing an increase in
the pick up in pulses inflation. The higher stock-to-use
input costs. This was followed by price increases by
(STU) ratio (Chart II.11), aggressive procurement for
other state cooperatives.
central pool and supply-side interventions – like open
Inflation in prices of oils and fats (weight of 3.6 per
market operations along with the decision to release
chana dal at a discount to states and union territories cent in the CPI and 7.8 per cent within the food and
(UTs) for welfare schemes – are, however, expected to beverages group) eased during H1:2022-23, reaching
contain pressures in pulses price in H2. 4.6 per cent in August, after remaining in double
digits for more than two years (Chart II.13). The
Regarding animal-based protein items, prices
moderation in inflation was supported by easing
increased sharply in H1:2022-23, driven by meat and
fish (weight of 3.6 per cent in the CPI and 7.9 per cent global prices, supply-side measures undertaken by
within the food and beverages group) and milk and the government and higher domestic production
products (weight of 6.6 per cent in the CPI and 14.4 (4.9 per cent in 2021-22). Global prices of edible oils,
per cent within the food and beverages group) (Chart which had surged in March with the onset of the war,

Chapter II Prices and Costs
by the government, including an extension of stock
Chart II.12: Drivers of Animal Protein Prices
limits on edible oils and oilseeds up to December
(H1:2022-23 over H2:2021-22)
31, 2022, the reduction in basic customs duty (BCD)
to 0 per cent till March 31, 2023, allocation of tariff
rate quota (TRQ) import of 2.0 million tonnes each
for crude soybean and sunflower oil for the financial
year 2022-23 and 2023-24 at 0 per cent BCD and
AIDC and hike in minimum support prices (MSPs)
of kharif oilseeds for 2022-23 (5.4 per cent to 8.9 per
cent increase). On the other hand, rising milk prices
resulted in upside pressures in ghee and butter
prices.
Prices of sugar and confectionery (weight of 1.4 per
cent in the CPI and 3.0 per cent in the food and
Notes: Figure in parentheses indicate weight in CPI-animal protein group.
H1:2022-23 refers to April-August. beverages group) remained muted during March-July
Sources: NSO and RBI staff estimates.
2022 on the back of higher production (7.7 per cent
corrected with the lifting of the export ban (imposed increase in sugarcane production in 2022-23) and
on April 28, 2022) effective from May 23, 2022, the export restrictions on sugar effective from June 1,
removal of export levy until August 31, 2022, and 2022 to ensure ample domestic supplies. However,
the reduction in export duties by Indonesia. Price prices increased in August 2022 on higher exports
pressures also abated due to the supply side steps (which rose by 32.5 per cent y-o-y during April-July
2022) coming from a relaxation of export limits and
Chart II.13: Movement in Edible Oil Prices:
from expectations of a healthy festive demand.
Global vs Domestic
Among other food items, inflation in prices of
spices remained in double digits during H1:2022-23,
reflecting lower production ((-) 1.9 per cent in 2021-
22), especially in the case of key spices like coriander,
cumin, black pepper and red chillies. Furthermore,
prepared meals witnessed a rise in prices, due to an
increase in input costs such as edible oils, LPG and
transport charges.
Retail Margins
Retail price margins – the difference of retail and
wholesale prices11 – for cereals and pulses, which had
been on the rise since the outbreak of the COVID-19
Sources: World Bank Pink Sheet; NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
pandemic, remained at elevated levels during H1.
11 Item level retail and wholesale prices are aggregated at respective subgroups using item level CPI weights. Data for January-March 2021 have been
excluded due to changes in price collection mechanism and item varieties (DCA).

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart II.14: Retail and Wholesale Prices and Margins
a: Cereals b: Pulses
c: Vegetables d: Edible Oils (packed)
Sources: Department of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution; and RBI staff estimates.
Margins in edible oils moderated somewhat in April prices. Electricity prices have remained in deflation
2022 due to a higher degree of softening in retail in 2022 so far (Chart II.15).
mustard oil prices relative to wholesale prices. In the
Core
case of vegetables, margins rose in May-June 2022,
driven by the sharp uptick in tomato retail prices, but Core inflation, i.e., CPI inflation excluding food and
they moderated subsequently with the correction in fuel, increased sharply after the start of the war
tomato prices (Chart II.14). to 7.1 per cent in April 2022 from 5.8 per cent in
February. It moderated thereafter on favourable base
Fuel
effects, the reduction in excise duties on petrol and
CPI fuel inflation surged from 7.5 per cent in March
diesel and some deceleration in price momentum.
2022 to 11.8 per cent by July 2022 on the back of
During June-August, core inflation remained steady
sharp increases in LPG and subsidised kerosene
at around 6.0 per cent, including when other volatile
(PDS) prices which, in turn, reflected the sharp
items such as petrol, diesel, gold and silver are
jump in global energy prices following the conflict
excluded (Table II.1).
in Ukraine. Fuel inflation moderated to 10.8 per cent
in August due to decline in kerosene (PDS) prices Core inflation has been persistent and elevated
reflecting pass through of the fall in international since 2021, due to repeated cost-push shocks in

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.15: CPI Fuel Group Inflation
a: Fuel Prices (y-o-y)
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI - fuel and light.
b: Kerosene: Domestic and International Prices c: LPG: Domestic and International Prices
Notes: (1) The indicative international price for kerosene is the Singapore Jet Kero spot price.
(2) The international price for LPG is based on spot prices for Saudi Butane and Propane, combined in the ratio of 60:40 respectively. These international product
prices are indicative import prices. Further details are available at www.ppac.org.in.
(3) The domestic prices of LPG and kerosene represent the average prices of four and three metros, respectively, as reported by Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL).
Domestic prices of LPG are monthly average prices.
Sources: NSO; Bloomberg; IOCL; and RBI staff estimates.
manufacturing and services (Chart II.16). During
Table II.1: Exclusion-based Measures of Core
2022-23 (April-August), core inflation averaged 6.2 per
Inflation (y-o-y)
cent (5.9 per cent a year ago), with pressures broad-
Month CPI excluding CPI excluding CPI excluding food
food and fuel food fuel petrol fuel petrol diesel based, particularly in the goods component (Chart II.17).
(47.3) diesel (45.0) gold silver (43.8)
Jun-21 6.1 5.3 5.4 The jump in core inflation by 126 basis points between
Sep-21 5.9 5.2 5.6
February and April 2022 was considerably influenced
Dec-21 6.1 5.6 5.9
Jan-22 6.0 5.6 5.8 by spillovers from the increases in international crude
Feb-22 5.8 5.6 5.7 oil and gold prices following the start of the war in
Mar-22 6.4 6.2 6.1
end-February. As international crude oil prices inched
Apr-22 7.1 6.5 6.4
May-22 5.9 5.5 5.5 upwards of US$ 120 per barrel in March, domestic
Jun-22 6.0 6.1 6.1
petrol and diesel pump prices rose by around `10 per
Jul-22 6.0 6.3 6.4
Aug-22 5.9 6.2 6.2 litre between March 22 and April 6, 2022 and then
Notes: (1) Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI. remained unchanged till May 22, 2022. Pump prices
(2) Derived as residual from headline CPI.
then fell, following the reduction in excise duties
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart II.16: CPI Inflation excluding Chart II.17: Contribution to CPI excluding Food
Food and Fuel: Persistence Fuel (Core) Inflation (in percentage points)
4.8
CPIexcludingfoodfuel (y-o-y, percent) 6.0
6.2
ofwhich
0.6
Transportandcommunication(18.2) 1.7
1.3
0.7
Health(12.5) 1.0
0.7
0.5
Clothingandfootwear(13.8) 1.0
1.3
1.3
Housing(21.3) 0.8
0.8
0.3
Householdgoodsandservices(8.0) 0.4
0.6
0.4
Personalcareandeffects(8.2) 0.4
0.6
0.5
Education(9.4) 0.3
0.4
Others*(8.6) 0 0 .5 .5
0.4
Memo
Coregoods(51.3) 2.1 3.7
3.6
2.7
Coreservices(48.7) 2.3
2.6
Average(2017-18 to2019-20) 2021-22 2022-23(Apr-Aug)
* Others include Pan, tobacco and intoxicants; and Recreation and amusement.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI excluding food and fuel.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates. Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
by `8 per litre on petrol and by `6 per litre on diesel Coupled with favourable base effects, the cut in
(Chart II.18). excise duties resulted in CPI petrol and diesel
Chart II.18: Price Build-Up (IOCL Delhi Prices)
a: Petrol b: Diesel
Sources: IOCL; PPAC; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Chart II.19: Petrol and Diesel Inflation (y-o-y) Chart II.20: CPI excluding Food, Fuel, Petrol,
Diesel, Gold and Silver: SAAR Diffusion Index
by Thresholds
Sources: NSO; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates. Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
prices moving to the deflationary zone by August inflation remained significantly higher than core
2022. Price increases in WPI petrol and diesel were services inflation. Inflation in the goods component
higher at 53 per cent (y-o-y) in August, largely (with a weight of 20.7 per cent in the headline CPI)
reflecting the fact that indirect taxes are included increased from 7.1 per cent in February 2022 to 7.7
in CPI but excluded from WPI (Chart II.19). On the per cent in April, driven by clothing and footwear
whole, the reduction in excise duties had a direct items, household goods and personal care items
softening impact of 43 bps on core inflation and 20 (including fast-moving consumer goods (FMCGs) and
household utensils) along with health, transport and
bps on headline inflation. The decline in gold prices
communications goods. Though core goods inflation
during May-July also contributed to the moderation
moderated to 6.5 per cent in May, the respite was
of core inflation.
short-lived as it edged up by around 72 bps during
Threshold diffusion indices for CPI excluding food,
June-August, coming mainly from a further rise in
fuel, petrol, diesel, gold and silver indicate that a
inflation in clothing and footwear, and household
large majority of items exhibited price increases in
goods and personal care items.
excess of 4 per cent and 6 per cent (on a saar basis)
Core services inflation (with a weight of 23.0 per cent
during March-April 2022. Although pressures relaxed
in the headline CPI) also rose from 4.7 per cent in
to some extent during May-July, these firmed up
February 2022 to 5.2 per cent in August (Chart II.21b),
again for a majority of items in August (Chart II.20).
due to pressures from education (tuition and other
Inflation in CPI excluding food, fuel, petrol, diesel, fees), transport services (bus/tram/taxi fare, airfare,
gold and silver registered increases across both goods steamer/boat charges) and housing. Despite some
and services during March-August 2022, reflecting rise, inflation in housing, the largest component in
pass-through of pent-up input cost pressures to output services, remained muted in H1 (averaging 3.8 per
prices (Chart II.21a). During this period, core goods cent between April-August).

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart II.21: Contributions to CPI Inflation excluding Food, Fuel, Petrol, Diesel, Gold and Silver
a: Goods b: Services



5.2






Note: Figures in parentheses indicate weights in CPI.
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
Like exclusion-based core inflation indicators, measured by the CPI for industrial workers (CPI-IW)
trimmed mean measures12 point towards a persisted below the CPI headline during March-July
generalised upsurge in inflation with a peak in
April 2022 and some moderation thereafter till July. Table II.2: Trimmed Mean Measures of Core
The trimmed measures picked up again in August Inflation (y-o-y)
(Table II.2). Month 5% 10% 25% Weighted
trimmed trimmed trimmed Median
Other Measures of Inflation
Jun-21 5.7 5.2 5.0 5.2
Inflation measured by sectoral CPIs for agricultural Sep-21 5.0 4.9 4.8 4.3
Dec-21 5.8 5.4 5.2 4.7
labourers (CPI-AL) and rural labourers (CPI-RL)
Jan-22 5.9 5.6 5.3 5.1
remained below CPI headline inflation during July
Feb-22 6.0 5.7 5.3 5.6
2020-June 2022. Lower food inflation, combined with Mar-22 6.6 6.3 6.1 6.1
the high weightage of food in the CPI-AL and the CPI- Apr-22 7.3 7.0 6.6 6.5
May-22 6.4 6.1 5.5 5.7
RL vis-à-vis the CPI, contributed to the lower inflation
Jun-22 6.2 6.0 5.7 5.7
prints during this period. In August 2022, with the rise
Jul-22 6.1 6.0 5.7 5.7
in food prices, CPI-AL and CPI-RL inflation moved close Aug-22 6.6 6.4 6.2 6.5
to/marginally above CPI headline inflation. Inflation Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
12 While exclusion-based measures drop a fixed set of volatile items (for example, food and fuel) in each period, trimmed measures exclude items located
in the tails of the inflation distribution - items displaying changes more than the specified threshold in prices each month are excluded and the items
dropped differ from month to month.

stniopegnatnecrepninoitubirtnoC
02-beF 02-rpA 02-nuJ 02-guA 02-tcO 02-ceD 12-beF 12-rpA 12-nuJ 12-guA 12-tcO 12-ceD 22-beF 22-rpA 22-nuJ 22-guA
Chapter II Prices and Costs
2022 as food inflation was generally lower in the CPI- the deflators for gross value added (GVA) and gross
IW vis-à-vis the CPI. Moreover, lower housing inflation domestic product (GDP) edged up sharply between
in CPI-IW, paired with high weightage of housing vis-à- Q4:2021-22 to Q1:2022-23 (Chart II.22a).
vis the headline, also added to the softness in CPI-IW
During March-August 2022, all the major sub-groups of
inflation prints.
WPI remained substantially above their corresponding
WPI inflation has been in double digits since April CPI subgroups (Chart II.22b). Petrol and diesel prices
2021 and increased to an all-time high of 16.6 per inflation in WPI exceeded CPI inflation, largely
cent (as per the WPI series, 2011-12=100) in May reflecting the reductions in excise duty and state VAT
2022 before moderating during June-August. Despite rates which are captured in CPI but are excluded in
strong favourable base effects, the spike in crude oil WPI. High energy prices in the international market
and commodity prices following the war drove WPI are mirrored in the fuel and power group of the WPI.
inflation during March-May 2022. The steep rise The spike in international commodity prices and
in international commodity prices resulted in WPI industrial intermediaries resulted in a hardening
non-food manufactured products inflation persisting of WPI non-food manufactured products inflation,
in double digits during May 2021-May 2022. WPI which also contributed to WPI inflation ruling above
inflation moderated to 12.4 per cent in August 2022 the CPI. Within food, WPI inflation was higher than
on account of an easing of price pressures in basic CPI in cereals, vegetables, fruits, eggs and spices.
metals, textiles, and food products, particularly Moreover, WPI does not include services, which is
vegetable and animal oils and fats, in an environment witnessing lower inflation compared with goods
of favourable base effects. In line with WPI inflation, inflation in the CPI.
Chart II.22: Alternative Measures of Inflation
a: Various Measures of Inflation (y-o-y) b: CPI-WPI Divergence: Select Commodities
(Average during March-August 2022)
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4 2 2
0 0
-2 -2
-4 -4
-6 -6
-8 -8
-10 -10
Sources: NSO; Labour Bureau; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.

tnec
reP
02-beF 02-rpA 02-nuJ 02-guA 02-tcO 02-ceD 12-beF 12-rpA 12-nuJ 12-guA 12-tcO 12-ceD 22-beF 22-rpA 22-nuJ 22-guA
stniopegatnecreP
Vegetables 14.4 33.0
Oils and fats 11.8 9.8
Footwear 11.6 2.7
Spices 11.3 18.3
Fueland light 10.1 41.3
Clothing 9.2 4.2 Petrol 8.8 59.1
Cerealsandproducts 6.4 9.0
Milk and products 5 5 .3 .7
Sugar andconfectionery 4.7 5.3
Diesel 4.7 71.0
Fruits 4.4 17.4
Pan,tobaccoandintoxicants 2 3 .0 .6
Pulsesandproducts 0.0 0.9
CPI-WPIgap (right scale) WPI Egg -2.7 3.3
CPI-IW CPI-AL -20 0 20 40 60 80
CPI-RL CPI Per cent
GVAdeflator GDPdeflator CPI WPI
Monetary Policy Report September 2022
II.3 Costs
Chart II.23: Farm and Non-farm Input Cost
During H1:2022-23 (up to August), cost pressures Inflation (y-o-y)
measured by WPI inflation in industrial raw materials
and farm inputs remained firm, notwithstanding
some softening. Inflation in the prices of industrial
inputs – such as high-speed diesel (HSD), naphtha,
aviation turbine fuel (ATF), bitumen, petroleum
coke, and furnace oil – which had peaked at 34.1 per
cent in May 2022 under the impact of high crude
oil prices moderated to 22.1 per cent in August with
the correction in crude prices (Chart II.23). After
hardening during March-May 2022, the prices of
* : Comprise primary non-food articles, minerals, coal, aviation turbine fuel, high
non-food primary articles eased from June 2022
speed diesel, naphtha, bitumen, furnace oil, lube oil, petroleum coke, electricity,
due to the moderation in the prices of fibres and cotton yarn and paper and pulp from WPI.
$ : Comprise high speed diesel, fodder, electricity, fertilisers, pesticides, and
oilseeds mirroring international price trends. Prices agricultural and forestry machinery from WPI.
Sources: Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and RBI staff estimates.
of minerals, despite mixed trends and high volatility,
broadly eased during March-August 2022. During July-
electricity – a key input in both industrial and farm
August 2022, the pressures on industrial raw materials
inputs – increased sharply due to positive momentum
prices ebbed in line with the easing global metal
as well as adverse base effects.
prices. The export duty hike on iron ore and certain
steel products also helped to contain price pressures Nominal rural wage growth for both agricultural and
(Chart II.23). The farm input price inflation was largely non-agricultural labourers remained muted during
driven by increase in HSD prices, agricultural and H1:2022-23 (up to July) (Chart II.24). This can be
forestry machinery, fodder on account of dry weather expected to contain the build-up of a wage-price spiral
conditions, and fertilisers. Inflation in price of WPI (Box II.2).
Chart II.24: Wage Growth (y-o-y) and Inflation in Rural Areas (y-o-y)
*: comprise ploughing, sowing, harvesting, picking, horticulture workers, fishermen, fishermen costal, loggers and wood cutters, animal husbandry, packaging, general
agriculture labourers and plant protection workers.
**: comprise carpenter, blacksmith, mason, weavers, beedi makers, bamboo-cane basket weavers, handicraft workers, plumbers, electrician, construction workers, LMV &
tractor drivers, sweeping/cleaning workers and other non-agricultural labourers.
Note: Data for April-May 2020 and 2021 were not released.
Sources: NSO; Labour Bureau; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter II Prices and Costs
Box II.2: An Examination of the Rural Prices and Wages Dynamics in India
Available data on rural wages and rural consumer price
Table II.2.1: Rural Wages and Rural Prices –
indices show episodes of co-movement as well as marked
Panel Cointegration Results
divergences (notably July 2010-October 2013 when rural
Price Equation: Δln(price) Wage Equation: Δln(wage)
real wages registered sharp increases, outpacing CPI
Long run equation: ln(price) = Long run equation: ln(wage) =
inflation) (Chart II.2.1). a x ln(wage) + ECT a x ln(price) + ECT
a 0.40*** a 0.57***
In order to explore wage-price dynamics, a state-level
(0.04) (0.07)
cointegration panel analysis of the relationship between
Short run equations
rural prices (using data for CPI-Rural) and rural wages
ECT -0.14*** ECT -0.12**
(for agricultural and non-agricultural workers) for the (0.02) (0.05)
pre-COVID period of April 2017 to February 2020 is Δln(wage) -0.05 Δln(price) -0.03
(0.06) (0.08)
undertaken. Pedroni’s panel tests suggest the existence
Δln(price) (-1) 0.16*** Δln(wage) (-1) -0.00
of a long-term cointegrating relation between wages and (0.05) (0.06)
prices. The long and short-run dynamics are examined
Δln(wage) (-1) -0.11* Δln(price) (-1) -0.22
(0.06) (0.15)
on the basis of the Pooled Mean Group (PMG) estimator Rainfall deviation 0.00*** Rainfall deviation -0.00
(Pesaran et al., 1999). The long-run coefficients are below (0.00) (0.00)
Constant 0.37** Constant 0.39**
unity in both the prices and wage equations (0.41 and
(0.05) (0.15)
0.57, respectively), indicating less than proportional
Note: ***, ** and * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10 per cent levels,
increase in prices in response to wage shocks and vice respectively. Figures in parentheses indicate standard errors.
versa. Turning to short-run dynamics, the coefficients 1. The sample consists of 17 major states for the period April 2017 to Feb
2020.
of the error correction term (ECT) in both the equations 2. Rural wages have been calculated as a simple average of the rural
agricultural and rural non-agricultural wages, following Kundu (2019).
Source: RBI staff estimates.
Chart II.2.1: Rural Wage Growth and Rural Inflation
are significant: in the case of any shock, both prices and

wages adjust quickly towards their long-run levels, and

the speed of adjustment in prices is somewhat faster than

in wages (Table II.2.1).

References:

Pesaran, M. Hashem, Yongcheol Shin, and Ron Smith

(1999), “Pooled Mean Group Estimation of Dynamic
-5
Heterogeneous Panels”, Journal of the American Statistical
-10
Association, 94.446, pp. 621-634.
Kundu, Sujata (2019), “Rural Wage Dynamics in India:
What Role does Inflation Play”, RBI Occasional Paper, 40,
Sources: NSO; Labour Bureau; and RBI staff estimates.
pp. 51-84.
In the organised sector, growth in staff cost broadly unchanged in the manufacturing sector
(y-o-y basis) decelerated in Q1:2022-23 in both in Q1 compared to the previous quarter, while it
manufacturing and services sectors. The share decreased marginally in the services sector
of staff cost in the value of production was (Chart II.25).

tnec
reP
10-guA 20-tcO 30-ceD 50-beF 60-rpA 70-nuJ 80-guA 90-tcO 01-ceD 21-beF 31-rpA 41-nuJ 51-guA 61-tcO 71-ceD 91-beF 02-rpA 12-nuJ 22-guA
Ruralwagegrowth CPI rurallabourersinflation
CPI ruralinflation
Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart II.25: Labour Cost in Manufacturing and Services
a: Staff Cost in Manufacturing Sector b: Staff Cost in Services Sector
Note: The staff cost growth (y-o-y) is based on common set of companies.
Sources: Capitaline database; and RBI staff estimates.
As per the firms polled in the Reserve Bank’s sectors may see higher pressures. Input costs and
enterprise surveys13, the pace of salary outgoes for selling prices for the manufacturing, services and
the manufacturing sector is expected to moderate infrastructure sector firms are likely to soften in Q3
in Q3:2022-23 while the services and infrastructure (Chart II.26).
Chart II.26. Expectations of Cost Conditions (Net Response)
a: Salary Outgo b: Cost of Inputs c: Selling Prices




50 46.0
40.9 40
32.5 30



-10
-20
Note: ‘Net response’ is the difference between the percentage of respondents reporting increase in prices and those reporting decrease.
Sources: Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey; Services & Infrastructure Outlook Survey; and RBI staff estimates.
13 Industrial Outlook Survey; and Services and Infrastructure Outlook Survey.

noisnapxE
noitcartnoC
)tnec
repni(esnopseR
teN
91-8102:3Q 02-9102:1Q 02-9102:3Q 12-0202:1Q 12-0202:3Q 22-1202:1Q 22-1202:3Q 32-2202:1Q 32-2202:3Q




50 45.1

27.0 30
20 19.6


-10
-20
91-8102:3Q 02-9102:1Q 02-9102:3Q 12-0202:1Q 12-0202:3Q 22-1202:1Q 22-1202:3Q 32-2202:1Q 32-2202:3Q


70 64.2

50 48.7
40 44.5




-10
-20
91-8102:3Q 02-9102:1Q 02-9102:3Q 12-0202:1Q 12-0202:3Q 22-1202:1Q 22-1202:3Q 32-2202:1Q 32-2202:3Q
Chapter II Prices and Costs
One-year ahead business inflation expectations
Chart II.27: Input-Output Price Gap
after peaking in April 2022, fell during May-July but

ticked up in August 2022, according to the survey by

the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad.14 6
Survey respondents also reported that cost pressures 4

re-emerged in August and optimism on sales and

profit margins fell.
-2
According to manufacturing firms polled in the -4
purchasing managers’ index (PMI) surveys, while -6
-8
input prices rose, there was an easing of the
-10
momentum during May-August 2022 due to softening
-12
metal and intermediate goods prices. In PMI services,
input prices remained elevated, with an easing of
the momentum in June-August 2022. Output price
inflation for both manufacturing and services sectors Sources: S&P Global; and RBI staff estimates.
was benign relative to input price inflation and the
input-output price gap has moderated due to the domestic weather shocks. Consumer price inflation
softening input prices momentum, coupled with peaked in April 2022. It has since then moderated, but
gradual pass-through of cost burdens (Chart II.27). persists above the pre-war levels and also above the
upper tolerance band. Its return to the target is expected
II.4 Conclusion
to be gradual. The outlook is, however, fraught with
Inflationary pressures have escalated globally due considerable uncertainties, given the highly volatile
to the successive black swan events – the COVID-19 geopolitical situation, spillovers from the elevated
pandemic and the conflict in Ukraine. Mirroring global global financial market volatility and recurring adverse
developments, India also experienced a sharp pick-up climatic conditions. Monetary policy remains focused
in inflationary pressures in H1, following the jump on ensuring that inflation remains within the target
in global commodity prices as well as due to adverse going forward, while supporting growth.
14 The monthly Business Inflation Expectations Survey (BIES) of the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad, polls a panel of businesses, primarily
the manufacturing sector, about their inflation expectations in the short and medium term. The latest survey (August 2022 round) was based on the
responses of around 900 companies.

paGxednI
02-beF 02-rpA 02-nuJ 02-guA 02-tcO 02-ceD 12-beF 12-rpA 12-nuJ 12-guA 12-tcO 12-ceD 22-beF 22-rpA 22-nuJ 22-guA
Manufacturing Services
III. Demand and Output
Domestic economic activity exhibited resilience in H1:2022-23. The buoyancy in aggregate demand was supported
by private consumption and investment demand. Geopolitical tensions, tightening of global financial markets
and global economic slowdown, however, pose downside risks to the domestic outlook.
Domestic economic activity exhibited resilience III.1 Aggregate Demand
in H1:2022-23 in spite of some moderation in
Real gross domestic product (GDP) posted a growth
momentum relative to H2:2021-22. With the recovery
of 13.5 per cent (year-on-year, y-o-y) in Q1:2022-23,
of manufacturing and contact-intensive services,
aided by favourable base effects. Accordingly, real
aggregate supply conditions are improving. Aggregate GDP surpassed pre-pandemic level by 3.8 per cent
demand is underpinned by private consumption, (Chart III.1 and Table III.1). All constituents of
which is holding up well and set to be boosted aggregate demand recorded expansion in Q1 and were
in the festival season. Investment activity gained above their respective pre-pandemic levels.
traction with robust government capex. On the other
The momentum – the quarter-on-quarter (q-o-q)
hand, subdued government consumption and the
seasonally adjusted annualised growth rate (saar) -
contraction in net exports have operated as drags.
was, however, negative in Q1:2022-23, pulled down by
Headwinds from intensified geopolitical tensions,
government consumption and a sharp jump in imports
elevated international commodity prices, heightened (Chart III.1a and b). Available data for Q2 indicate that
volatility in global financial markets, and slowdown aggregate demand remained buoyant, supported by
in external demand are the key downside risks to the the ongoing recovery in private consumption and
outlook. investment demand.
Chart III.1: GDP Growth and its Constituents
a: Weighted Contribution of the Components to b: GDP Growth and Momentum
GDP Growth
Note: saar – Seasonally adjusted annualised rate.
Sources: National Statistical Office (NSO) and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Table III.1: Real GDP Growth
(y-o-y, per cent)
Item 2020-21 2021-22 Weighted 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
(FRE) (PE) Contribution*
2020-21 2021-22 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Private final consumption expenditure -6.0 7.9 -3.4 4.5 -23.7 -8.3 0.6 6.5 14.4 10.5 7.4 1.8 25.9
(1.4) (-12.7) (1.3) (8.0) (8.3) (9.9)
Government final consumption expenditure 3.6 2.6 0.4 0.3 13.6 -22.9 -0.3 29.0 -4.8 8.9 3.0 4.8 1.3
(6.3) (8.2) (-16.1) (2.6) (35.1) (9.6)
Gross fixed capital formation -10.4 15.8 -3.3 4.8 -45.3 -4.5 -0.6 10.1 62.5 14.6 2.1 5.1 20.1
(3.8) (-11.2) (9.5) (1.5) (15.7) (6.7)
Exports -9.2 24.3 -1.8 4.6 -25.5 -6.4 -8.6 3.7 40.8 20.7 23.1 16.9 14.7
(12.8) (4.8) (12.9) (12.5) (21.2) (20.2)
Imports -13.8 35.5 -3.2 7.5 -41.1 -17.9 -5.2 11.7 61.1 41.0 33.6 18.0 37.2
(16.8) (-5.1) (15.7) (26.7) (31.8) (30.3)
GDP at market prices -6.6 8.7 -6.6 8.7 -23.8 -6.6 0.7 2.5 20.1 8.4 5.4 4.1 13.5
(1.5) (-8.5) (1.2) (6.2) (6.7) (3.8)
Note: *: Component-wise contributions to growth do not add up to GDP growth because change in stocks, valuables and discrepancies are not included.
Figures in parentheses are growth rates over 2019-20. FRE: First revised estimates, PE: Provisional estimates.
Source: National Statistical Office (NSO).
GDP Projections versus Actual Outcomes imports at 37.2 per cent in Q1 surprised significantly
on the upside.
The April 2022 Monetary Policy Report (MPR) had
projected real GDP growth at 16.2 per cent for III.1.1 Private Final Consumption Expenditure
Q1:2022-23. Actual growth undershot the projection
Private final consumption expenditure (PFCE) –
by 270 basis points (bps) (Chart III.2), due to a larger-
the mainstay of aggregate demand – recorded a
than-expected drag from net exports and sluggish
solid growth of 25.9 per cent in Q1:2022-23 and
growth in government expenditure. The growth in its share in overall GDP inched up to 59.9 per cent
from 54.0 per cent a year ago. Expanded vaccination
coverage and milder new COVID-19 infections
Chart III.2: GDP Growth: Projection versus
(Chart III.3) provided a fillip to consumer confidence
Actual - Q1:2022-23
and discretionary spending, particularly on travel,
hotels and restaurants, recreation and culture.
Amongst the high frequency indicators (HFIs) of urban
consumption, domestic air passenger traffic recorded
a sustained recuperation, albeit still lagging its
pre-pandemic levels (Chart III.4a). Passenger vehicle
sales posted strong growth in Q1 and Q2, surging
past pre-pandemic levels, despite headwinds from
protracted supply chain disruptions (Chart III.4b).
The production of consumer durables gained traction,
boosted by discretionary spending (Chart III.4c).
Improving urban consumption was also reflected
in the acceleration in bank credit to households
Sources: NSO and RBI staff estimates.
(Chart III.4d).

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart III.3: COVID Infections and Vaccination
a: New Cases b: Cumulative Vaccination Status
(7-day moving average) (month-end)
Source: Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoH&FW).
Rural demand remained muted in Q1:2022-23, with the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
some signs of recovery in Q2. Work demanded under Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) declined sharply in July-
Chart III.4: Urban Demand: High-Frequency Indicators
a: Domestic Air Passenger Traffic b: Passenger Vehicle Sales
c: Consumer Durables d: Household Credit
Sources: Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM); NSO; and RBI.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.5: Rural Demand: High Frequency Indicators
a: Tractor Sales b: Motorcycle Sales
c: Consumer Non-durables d: Fertiliser Sales
Sources: Tractor Manufactures Association; Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM); NSO; and Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers.
August 2022, with improving conditions in the rural conditions in the organised sector during July 2022
farm labour market. Motorcycle sales expanded y-o-y (Chart III.6b). According to Naukri Jobspeak data,
and exceeded pre-pandemic levels in August. The increased hiring was witnessed in hospitality, retail,
production of consumer non-durables remained insurance, real estate, banking and financial services
subdued in H1. Tractor sales remained above their segments.
pre-pandemic levels, although they were lower y-o-y in
III.1.2 Gross Fixed Capital Formation
July-August partly due to the high base of record sales
registered last year. Fertiliser sales recovered in August
Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) recorded a
with the progress of kharif sowing (Chart III.5).
growth of 20.1 per cent in Q1:2022-23; consequently,
As per the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy’s the share of GFCF in GDP rose to 34.7 per cent in Q1
(CMIE) Consumer Pyramids data, the labour force from 32.8 per cent a year ago. Construction activity
participation rate recovered in Q2 from the dip seen exhibited buoyancy, with the housing sector recording
in June, which pulled up the unemployment rate in an uptick in terms of both units launched and sold
August across urban and rural segments (Chart III.6a). during Q1. The proximate coincident indicators
The Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) of construction activity – steel consumption and
payrolls data pointed to improving employment cement production – posted strong growth in H1

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart III.6: Employment Situation in India
a: Unemployment and Labor Participation Rates b: Net Payroll Additions based on EPFO Records
Sources: CMIE; and Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO).
(Chart III.7). Imports of capital goods were led by capital goods crossed its pre-pandemic level in June-
electronics goods while the domestic production of July 2022.
Chart III.7: Indicators of Investment Demand
a: Imports of Capital Goods b: IIP Capital Goods
c: Finished Steel Consumption d: Cement Production
Sources: DGCI&S; NSO; Joint Plant Committee; and Office of Economic Adviser.

Chapter III Demand and Output
According to the RBI’s survey1, capacity utilisation (CU)
Chart III.8: Capacity Utilisation in
in the manufacturing sector declined to 72.4 per cent in
Manufacturing
Q1:2022-23 from 75.3 per cent in the previous quarter,
reflecting seasonal pattern. Seasonally adjusted
capacity utilisation, however, rose to 74.3 per cent in
Q1:2022-23 – the highest in the last three years – from
73.0 per cent in the previous quarter (Chart III.8).
Manufacturing firms recorded a sequential uptick in
new orders during Q1:2022-23. Infrastructure firms
displayed optimism on the overall business situation.
turnover and employment in Q2:2022-23.
The interest coverage ratio (ICR)2 of listed non-
financial private companies in the manufacturing and
information technology (IT) sectors remained high in
Q1:2022-23, and indicates comfortable debt servicing Source: RBI.
capacity and conducive conditions for expansion in
capacity (Chart III.9).
Q1:2022-23 [(-) 4.8 per cent a year ago], which dampened
III.1.3 Government Consumption
GDP growth (Table III.1). Revenue expenditure of the
The growth in government final consumption central government rose by 4.8 per cent (y-o-y) during
expenditure (GFCE) remained muted at 1.3 per cent in April-July 2022 as against a contraction of 7.0 per cent
Chart III.9: Interest Coverage Ratio in Manufacturing and Services Firms
Note: Data for Q1:2022-23 are based on results of 1,709 listed private manufacturing companies and 722 listed private non-financial services companies.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
1 Survey of order books, inventories and capacity utilisation.
2 Interest coverage ratio is the ratio of earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) to interest expenses and measures a company’s capacity to make interest
payments on its debt. The minimum value for a viable ICR is 1.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Table III.2: Central Government’s Tax Collections
Item ` thousand crore Per cent
Budget Estimates Actuals Per cent to BE Growth Rate
2021-22 2022-23 Apr-July Apr-July Apr-July Apr-July Apr-July Apr-July
2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022
A. Direct taxes 1,108.00 1,420.00 314.5 446.4 28.4 31.4 110.9 41.9
Of which
1. Corporation tax 547 720 145.9 196.5 26.7 27.3 171.5 34.7
2. Income tax 548.5 680 161.2 241.8 29.4 35.6 76.7 50.0
B. Indirect taxes 1,109.10 1,337.80 381.4 423.0 34.4 31.6 65.2 10.9
Of which
1. GST 633.3 783.7 221.0 284.2 34.9 36.3 60.4 28.6
2. Custom duties 136 213 58.0 51.0 42.6 23.9 144.1 -12.0
3. Union excise duties 335 335 100.4 85.1 30 25.4 47.9 -15.2
C. Gross tax revenue 2,217.10 2,757.80 695.9 869.5 31.4 31.5 83.1 24.9
D. Assignment to States/UTs 665.6 816.6 165.1 201.1 24.8 24.6 -6.2 21.8
E. Net tax revenue 1,545.40 1,934.80 529.2 666.2 34.2 34.4 161.0 25.9
Note: GST also includes UT-GST.
Sources: Union Budget Documents and CGA.
a year ago. Component-wise, the impact of higher qualitative improvement in spending – the revenue
outgoes on interest payments was cushioned by lower expenditure to capital outlay (RECO) ratio decreased
spending on major subsidies, especially food. Capital to 4.8 in April-July 2022 from 7.3 in the corresponding
outlay, on the other hand, surged by 59.4 per cent period of the previous year (Chart III.10a). Frontloaded
during April-July 2022, reflecting the government’s capital expenditure was driven by increased spending
sustained thrust on infrastructure. This led to a in road and railway sectors (Chart III.10b).
Chart III.10: Centre’s Expenditure during April-July
a: Quality of Expenditure b: Expenditure Growth
Sources: Controller General of Accounts (CGA) and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.11: GST Collections (Centre plus States) Chart III.12: Non-tax Revenue: April-July
Source: PIB. Source: CGA.
On the receipts side, the central government’s gross During April-July 2022, the gross fiscal deficit (GFD)
tax revenues remained buoyant, registering a growth and the revenue deficit (RD) of the central government
of 24.9 per cent during April-July 2022, driven by direct at 20.5 per cent and 16.4 per cent of the full-year
tax and GST collections. Monthly GST collections budget estimate (BE), respectively, were lower than in
(Centre plus states) remained above `1.4 lakh crore the previous year.
since March 2022, benefitting from improving
As regards state governments, their consolidated GFD
economic activity and compliance (Chart III.11).
is budgeted at 3.3 per cent of their conslolidated GSDP
Union excise duties and customs duties, however,
in 2022-233 – within the 4 per cent4 limit allowed by
contracted on the back of cuts in excise duty on petrol
the Centre – supported by a healthy growth in revenue
and diesel in May 2022 and a reduction in customs receipts (Table III.3 and Chart III.13a). The states
duty on commodities such as cotton and palm oil.
Table III.3: State Government Finances –
The central government’s non-tax revenues fell
Key Deficit Indicators
during April-July due to lower dividends and profits
(Per cent of GSDP)
(Chart III.12). The recently concluded 5G spectrum
Item 2020-21 2021-22 2021-22 2022-23
auctions would provide a total revenue of `1.5 lakh (A) (BE) (PA) (BE)
Revenue Deficit 1.8 0.8 0.4 0.4
crore; of this, the first annual instalment would
Gross Fiscal Deficit 3.8 3.6 2.7 3.3
amount to `17,875 crore. Disinvestment receipts
Primary Deficit 2.0 1.7 1.1 1.5
jumped to `24,560 crore from `8,371 crore, driven by
A: Accounts; BE: Budget Estimates; PA: Provisional Accounts.
the proceeds of the initial public offer (IPO) of the Life Note: Data pertain to 29 states and UTs.
Sources: Budget Documents of State Governments; Comptroller and
Insurance Corporation (LIC). Auditor General (CAG) of India.
3 The data for 2022-23 pertain to 29 states/UTs. The estimates for 2021-22 (PA) have been worked out by collating the accounts (A) data for 27 states from
Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India, and the Budget Estimates for 2021-22 for 2 states/UT from their respective Budget Documents of 2021-22.
4 Of this 0.5 per cent will be tied to power sector reforms.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart III.13: Trend in Key Indicators of the States/UTs
a: Receipts and Expenditure of the States/UTs b: Deficit Indicators of States: April-June
Notes: 1. Data in panel a pertain to 29 states/UTs.
2. Data in panel b pertain to 26 states.
Sources: Budget Documents of State Governments and CAG.
have continued their focus on capital expenditure, amounting `1.16 lakh crore to the states to boost
with a budgeted growth of 36 per cent in capital their capex.
outlay. This would increase the capital outlay-GSDP
In the Union Budget 2022-23, gross and net market
ratio to 2.7 per cent in 2022-23 from 2.2 per cent in
borrowings were placed at `14.95 lakh crore and
2021-22 (PA). According to available data, the states’
`11.19 lakh crore, respectively. Taking into account
GFD declined substantially in Q1:2022-23 on account
the switch operations conducted just before the
of higher revenues and devolution from the Centre
Union Budget 2022-23, the gross market borrowings
(Chart III.13b). Revenue expenditure of states grew by
through dated securities for 2022-23 are estimated
14.3 per cent while capital expenditure contracted by
at `14.31 lakh crore. The centre’s gross issuances
9.6 per cent.
of market borrowings during H1:2022-23 (up to
The Union Budget 2022-23 provided for a 50-year September 27, 2022) were `7.96 lakh crore (55.6 per
interest-free loan of `1 lakh crore to states under cent of the full year’s budgeted amount) as against
the ‘Special Assistance to States for Capital `8.45 lakh crore planned in the calendar for H1
Investment’ scheme, over and above the borrowing (Table III.4). The weighted average cost and maturity
limit of 4 per cent of GSDP. In August 2022, the of issuances during H1 (up to September 27, 2022)
Centre released two instalments of tax devolution were 7.3 per cent and 15.7 years, respectively, as
Table III.4: Government Market Borrowings
(` crore)
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 (up to September 27)
Centre States Total Centre States Total Centre States Total
Net borrowings 11,43,114 6,51,777 17,94,891 8,63,103 4,92,483 13,55,586 5,68,639 1,79,878 7,48,517
Gross borrowings 13,70,324 7,98,816 21,69,140 11,27,382 7,01,626 18,29,008 7,96,000 2,76,347 10,72,347
Sources: Government of India; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter III Demand and Output
against 6.2 per cent and 16.7 years, respectively,
Chart III.14: Merchandise Trade
during 2021-22. States raised gross market borrowings
of `2.76 lakh crore during H1 (up to September 27,
2022), 68.8 per cent of the indicative calendar. The
Ways and Means Advances (WMA) limit for the
Central Government for H1:2022-23 was enhanced
to `1.5 lakh crore from `1.2 lakh crore in H1:2021-22
for bridging temporary mismatches between receipts
and expenditure. For states/union territories, the
WMA limits were fixed at `47,010 crore effective
from April 1, 2022 as recommended by the Advisory
Committee on Ways and Means Advances to State
Governments (Chairman: Shri Sudhir Shrivastava).
III.1.4 External Demand
Amidst persisting geopolitical tensions and slowing Source: DGCI&S.
external demand, merchandise exports lost pace
above that of exports, net exports dragged down
during Q2 (July-August) after remaining resilient
aggregate demand in Q1:2022-23 [(-) 8.1 per cent of
during Q1. Merchandise imports, however, remained
GDP as compared with (-) 5.0 per cent in Q4:2021-22
buoyant during both Q1 and Q2 (July-August),
and (-) 3.0 per cent a year ago].
reflecting strong domestic demand conditions. These
developments led to a widening of the merchandise In April-August 2022, merchandise exports were
trade deficit (Chart III.14). Services trade, both driven by petroleum products, electronics, chemicals,
exports and imports registered an impressive engineering goods and ready-made garments.
performance in Q1. With the growth of imports well Exports of iron ore, cotton yarn, plastic and
Chart III.15: Exports Growth
a: Exports Growth-Relative Contribution b: Major Drivers of Exports in April-August 2022:
Relative Contribution
*Q2: July-August
Sources: DGCI&S and CPB, Netherlands.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart III.16: Imports Growth
a: Imports Growth-Relative Contribution b: Major Drivers of Imports in April-August 2022:
Relative Contribution
*Q2: July-August
Source: DGCI&S.
linoleum, handicrafts and carpets were, however, and machinery. Coal imports grew substantially,
restrained (Chart III.15). Export restrictions on a few despite elevated international prices, as the domestic
commodities such as wheat, steel and sugar due to demand for energy soared. The trade deficit more
domestic demand-supply balance also weighed on than doubled to US$ 124.5 billion in April-August
merchandise exports. 2022 from US$ 53.8 billion a year ago. Merchandise
exports are sensitive to global trade volumes while
Rising domestic demand and high international
merchandise imports are driven by domestic demand
commodity prices propelled merchandise imports in
(Box III.1).
H1:2022-23 (April-August). Oil imports accounted for
around half of this growth. Non-oil non-gold imports Services sector trade posted a robust growth in
also remained strong led by coal, electronics, chemicals, H1:2022-23 (April-July), building upon the significant
Box III.1: Drivers of India’s Merchandise Exports and Imports
India’s share in global merchandise exports has risen goods and 41 imported goods, belonging to four major
steadily from 0.9 per cent in 2005 to 1.7 per cent in groups, viz. agriculture commodities, metals, minerals
2019 (pre-pandemic). After the COVID-19 disruption, and metal products, petroleum products and chemical
both exports and imports rebounded strongly in 2021- and pharmaceutical products is undertaken.
22. It is important to understand the drivers of Indian
The volumes of exports and imports are determined
exports and imports and assess the relevant exchange
by the item-level relative prices of exports/imports5,
rate and income elasticities on a disaggregated basis.
For this, a panel cointegration analysis of 62 exported (Contd.)
5 The relative prices of India’s exports are derived by dividing the implied prices of India’s exported goods at item-level (dollar value by volume) by
corresponding international prices, while relative prices of imports are the ratio of landed prices of item-level imports (value of imported goods divided
by volume) to wholesale price indices of the relevant commodity groups.

Chapter III Demand and Output
real effective exchange rate (REER), global demand (for
Table III.1.1: Determinants of Indian Merchandise
exports), and domestic demand (for imports) (Raissi Exports and Imports: Pooled Mean Group Results
et al 2015). Relative prices measure industry-specific
Dependent Variable Log (Exports Volume) Log (Imports Volume)
competitiveness while the REER (40-currency trade- or
1 2 3 4 5 6
export-weighted) is as an indicator of overall external
Log (REER) -0.39* -0.37* 0.41** 0.63***
competitiveness; the empirical analysis explores the (0.22) (0.21) (0.16) (0.16)
Log (Relative -0.43*** -0.38*** -0.17*** -0.16***
sensitivity of the results to both these indicators. World
Price, item-level) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)
trade volume6 and domestic demand (GDP excluding Log 1.03*** 1.30*** 1.48***
(World Trade Volume) (0.15) (0.11) (0.15)
imports at constant prices) are used as indicators of
Log 1.00*** 0.96*** 0.86***
global demand and domestic activity, respectively. (Domestic Demand) (0.05) (0.04) (0.05)
The empirical analysis is based on pre-pandemic data ECT -0.46*** -0.41*** -0.40*** -0.58*** -0.51*** -0.51***
t-1 (0.03) (0.03) (0.03) (0.05) (0.05) (0.05)
(Q1:2011-12 to Q3:2019-20), using the pooled mean
Notes: ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at 1 per cent, 5 per cent and
group (PMG) estimator (Pesaran et al., 1999). 10 per cent level of significance, respectively. Figures in parentheses are robust
standard errors. ECT: error correction term.
The results indicate the presence of a long-run co- Source: RBI staff estimates.
integrating relationship between exports, relative prices,
Product (ODOP) scheme and the recently signed and the
REER and global demand on the one hand, and between
proposed bilateral trade agreements.
imports, relative prices, REER and domestic demand,
on the other hand. Productivity gains can support References
exports which are also highly elastic to global demand.
Raissi, M. and Volodymyr Tulin, 2015, “Price and Income
Merchandise imports exhibit a strong co-movement with
Elasticity of Indian Exports – The Role of Supply-Side
domestic economic activity, with an elasticity close to
Bottlenecks,” IMF Working Paper WP/15/161
unity. The estimated elasticity of exports with respect
to REER ranges from (-) 0.37 to (-) 0.39 in alternate Pesaran, M. Hashem, Yongcheol Shin, and Ron Smith
specifications and from (+) 0.41 to (+) 0.63 for imports. (1999), “Pooled Mean Group Estimation of Dynamic
India’s exports could get some boost from productivity Heterogeneous Panels”, Journal of the American
gains, policy initiatives like the One District, One Statistical Association, 94.446, pp. 621-634.
recovery during 2021-22 (Chart III.17). Services adoption and technology are expected to keep the
exports growth remained in double digits for the sector resilient. Services imports increased during
fifth consecutive quarter in Q1, buoyed by software Q1 on the back of a significant upsurge in outgoes
services, business, travel and transportation services.
under travel, transportation and business services.
Software and business services together constitute
In July, services exports and imports remained
more than 60 per cent share of India’s total services
buoyant, albeit the growth moderated.
exports. Although the risks of a recession in the US
The current account deficit was 2.8 per cent of GDP in
and Europe weigh on the software services sector,
India’s offshoring capabilities and competencies Q1: 2022-23. The merchandise trade deficit was at 8.1
and significant investments made by the major IT per cent of GDP while the net invisibles surplus was
companies towards automation, cost efficiency, cloud 5.3 per cent of GDP.
6 Released by CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart III.17: Services Trade Chart III.18: Net Foreign Direct and
Portfolio Investment
*: Net FDI pertains to July 2022; Net FPI is upto September 28, 2022.
Source: RBI. Sources: National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL) and RBI.
Turning to the financial account, net FDI flows stayed during April-August 2022, after net inflows of US$
robust at US$ 18.8 billion during April-July 2022 7.4 billion during 2021. Net flows under non-
(Chart III.18). Manufacturing, retail and wholesale resident deposits moderated to US$ 1.4 billion
trade, computer services, financial services, and during April-July 2022 from US$ 3.1 billion a year
communication services accounted for a major share
ago, due to outflows from FCNR(B) deposits and
of FDI in India during Q1. Singapore, Mauritius, the
lower inflows in NRE deposits. As on September
UAE, the US and the Netherlands were the major
23, 2022, India’s foreign exchange reserves stood
source countries of inward FDI to India, accounting
at US$ 537.5 billion.
for around 78 per cent of the total inflows.
III.2 Aggregate Supply
Foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) reduced their
exposure in domestic capital market in Q1, reflecting Aggregate supply – measured by gross value added
the generalised risk aversion towards EME assets (GVA) at basic prices – expanded by 12.7 per cent in
in the face of the strengthening of US dollar, Q1:2022-23 (18.1 per cent a year ago), surpassing its
intensified geopolitical tensions, elevated global pre-pandemic level of Q1:2019-20 by 4.7 per cent
inflation and faster policy tightening by major central (Table III.5). While agriculture and services sectors
banks. FPIs, however, turned net buyers in Q2 remained robust, industrial GVA growth moderated
with an investment of US$ 7.5 billion (up to
due to the escalation of input cost pressures and
September 28).
the lingering disruptions in global supply chains.
External commercial borrowings (ECBs) to The momentum of GVA, measured by q-o-q saar,
India recorded net outflows of US$ 2.6 billion was negative in Q1:2022-23 (Chart III.19).

Chapter III Demand and Output
Table III.5: Sector-wise Growth in GVA
(y-o-y, per cent)
Item 2020-21 2021-22 Weighted 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
(FRE) (PE) Contribution
2020-21 2021-22 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 3.3 3.0 0.5 0.5 3.0 3.2 4.1 2.8 2.2 3.2 2.5 4.1 4.5
(6.4) (5.2) (6.4) (6.7) (7.1) (9.9)
Industry -1.8 9.8 -0.4 2.2 -28.1 3.0 6.2 11.6 40.4 6.6 1.5 1.0 6.0
(7.9) (0.9) (9.9) (7.8) (12.7) (7.0)
Mining and quarrying -8.6 11.5 -0.2 0.3 -17.8 -7.9 -5.3 -3.9 18.0 14.5 9.2 6.7 6.5
(1.9) (-3.0) (5.5) (3.4) (2.6) (3.3)
Manufacturing -0.6 9.9 -0.1 1.8 -31.5 5.2 8.4 15.2 49.0 5.6 0.3 -0.2 4.8
(9.3) (2.1) (11.0) (8.7) (15.0) (7.0)
Electricity, gas, water supply and other utilities -3.6 7.5 -0.1 0.2 -14.8 -3.2 1.5 3.2 13.8 8.5 3.7 4.5 14.7
(3.6) (-3.0) (5.0) (5.2) (7.9) (11.2)
Services -7.8 8.8 -4.9 5.4 -24.3 -10.4 0.0 4.3 15.5 10.0 6.6 5.0 17.5
(0.4) (-12.6) (-1.4) (6.6) (9.4) (2.8)
Construction -7.3 11.5 -0.6 0.9 -49.4 -6.6 6.6 18.3 71.3 8.1 -2.8 2.0 16.8
(3.4) (-13.3) (0.9) (3.6) (20.6) (1.2)
Trade, hotels, transport, communication -20.2 11.1 -4.1 1.9 -49.9 -18.8 -10.1 -3.4 34.3 9.6 6.3 5.3 25.7
(-11.3) (-32.7) (-11.0) (-4.4) (1.7) (-15.5)
Financial, real estate and professional services etc. 2.2 4.2 0.5 1.0 -1.1 -5.2 10.3 8.8 2.3 6.1 4.2 4.3 9.2
(6.6) (1.1) (0.6) (14.9) (13.4) (10.5)
Public administration, defence and -5.5 12.6 -0.7 1.6 -11.4 -10.2 -2.9 1.7 6.2 19.4 16.7 7.7 26.3
other services (6.4) (-5.9) (7.3) (13.3) (9.5) (18.9)
GVA at basic prices -4.8 8.1 -4.8 8.1 -21.4 -5.9 2.1 5.7 18.1 8.3 4.7 3.9 12.7
(2.9) (-7.2) (1.9) (6.9) (9.8) (4.7)
Note: FRE: First revised estimates; PE: Provisional estimates.
Figures in parentheses are growth rates over 2019-20.
Source: NSO.
year ago) on the back of record rabi and horticulture
Chart III.19: GVA Growth and Momentum
production and resilience in allied activities. After a
sluggish start, the south-west monsoon (SWM) gained
momentum in July-August and the season’s rainfall
stood at 7 per cent above the long period average (LPA)
as on September 29, 2022 (1 per cent below LPA a year
ago), with 30 out of the 36 sub-divisions receiving
normal or above normal rainfall (Chart III.20a and
b). Some of the key rice-producing states, however,
received rainfall well below normal – Uttar Pradesh
(-28 per cent), Bihar (-31 per cent), Jharkhand (-21 per
cent) and West Bengal (-17 per cent). After lagging in
June-July, the area under kharif sowing made a smart
recovery in August. As of September 23, 2022, the
total kharif sowing area was 1.7 per cent above the
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.
normal area (5-year average); it was, however, 1.2 per
cent below a year ago due to shortfalls under rice (-5.5
III.2.1 Agriculture
per cent), pulses (-3.9 per cent) and oilseeds (-0.8 per
GVA in agriculture, forestry and fishing posted a cent) (Chart III.20c). The production weighted rainfall
growth of 4.5 per cent in Q1:2022-23 (2.2 per cent a (PRN) index at 100 as on September 23, 2022 was a

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
tad below its last year’s position (101 per cent) and cent of the full capacity – above the last year’s 78 per
the PRN for cotton, oilseeds, pulses and coarse cereals cent as well as above the decadal average of 75 per
exceeded the 5-year average (Chart III.20e and f). As of cent – brightening the prospects for the upcoming
September 22, 2022, reservoir levels stood at 88 per rabi season.
Chart III.20 Progress of Rainfall and Kharif sowing
a: Cumulative Weekly Progress of South-west Monsoon Rainfall b: Comparative Rainfall Position
c: Kharif Sowing Progress d: Reservoir Level (September 22, 2022)
e: Production-weighted Rainfall Index (PRN) f: PRN Crop-wise (June 1 - September 23)
(June 1 - September 23)
*Normal area as on date is the average of 5 years - 2017-18 to 2021.
Sources: India Meteorological Department (IMD), Central Water Commission, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare, Government of India, and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter III Demand and Output
According to the first advance estimates (FAE),
Table III.6: Kharif Crops Production
kharif 2022 foodgrains production is estimated at
(Lakh tonnes)
1,499.2 lakh tonnes, 3.9 per cent below last year's
Item 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2022-23
fourth advance estimates (0.4 per cent below FAE of
1st AE Growth (per
last year) driven by a decline of 6.1 per cent in rice cent) over
2021-22
production (Table III.6). Amongst other crops, cotton
1st AE 4th
and sugarcane output are estimated to be 9.6 per cent
AE
and 7.7 per cent above the previous year’s level, while
1. Foodgrains 1,433.8 1,495.6 1,560.4 1,499.2 -0.4 -3.9
oilseeds output will be 1.3 per cent lower. Rice 1,019.8 1,044.1 1,117.6 1,049.9 -1.9 -6.1
Coarse cereals 336.9 364.6 359.1 365.6 7.5 1.8
The government announced an increase of 4.4 – 8.9 Pulses 77.2 86.9 83.7 83.7 -11.4 0
Tur 38.3 42.8 43.4 38.9 -12.2 -10.4
per cent in minimum support prices (MSP) for kharif
Urad 13.0 16.0 19.4 18.4 -10.2 -5.2
2022-23 crops, ensuring a return of at least 50 per Moong 17.9 20.1 14.8 17.5 -14.6 18.2
2. Oilseeds (total) 223.2 240.3 238.9 235.7 0.8 -1.3
cent over the cost of production (as measured by A2 Groundnut 83.7 85.6 83.8 83.7 1.4 -0.1
plus FL7). The procurement of rice during the kharif Soyabean 112.2 129.0 130.0 128.9 1.4 -0.8
3. Cotton# 354.9 353.8 312.0 341.9 -5.6 9.6
marketing season 2021-22 (up to September 26, 2022) 4. Jute & Mesta## 99.1 95.6 103.2 100.9 5 -2.2
5. Sugarcane 3,557.0 3,992.5 4,318.1 4,650.5 10.9 7.7
at 592.8 lakh tonnes was 0.1 per cent higher over the
previous year, contributing to comfortable stocks of #: Lakh bales of 170 kgs each.
# #: Lakh bales of 180 kgs each.
rice at 2.6 times the buffer norm (352.9 lakh tonnes), Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare.
despite the extension of cereals distribution under the
Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PM-GKAY).
In the case of wheat, lower domestic production stocks at 248.2 lakh tonnes were marginally below the
resulted in lower procurement. As on August 31, 2022, buffer norm (Chart III.21a and b).
Chart III.21: Stock, Procurement and Buffer Norms Position – Rice and Wheat
a: Rice b: Wheat
Source: Food Corporation of India, Government of India (GoI).
7 A2 (out of pocket expenses) plus FL (family labour) includes all paid out costs such as expenses on hired labour, machines, rent paid for leased land,
seeds, fertilisers, irrigation charges, depreciation as well as imputed value of family labour.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
III.2.2 Industry
Chart III.22: Weighted Contribution to Industrial
Industrial GVA recorded a y-o-y growth of 6.0 per cent GVA Growth
in Q1:2022-23 (40.4 per cent in the same period a year
ago, driven by base effects). All components expanded
y-o-y and surpassed their Q1:2019-20 levels, despite
headwinds from higher input costs and global supply
chain bottlenecks (Chart III.22). Electricity, gas, water
supply and other utility services registered robust
growth, supported by revival of industrial activity and
normalisation of services.
The index of industrial production (IIP) rose by 10.0
per cent, y-o-y, during April-July (4.2 per cent above the
pre-pandemic level), supported by all its constituents
– mining, manufacturing and electricity (Chart III.23).
Sources: NSO and RBI staff estimates.
The expansion in manufacturing activity was driven
Chart III.23: Index of Industrial Production (IIP)
a: Sectoral Contribution to IIP Growth (y-o-y) b: Sectoral Contribution to IIP Growth over 2019
c: Use-based Contribution to IIP Growth (y-o-y) d: Use-based Contribution to IIP Growth over 2019
Sources: NSO; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter III Demand and Output
Chart III.24: Electricity Generation and Consumption
a: Electricity Generation and Demand Growth b: Electricty Consumption: Region-wise
Source: Central Electricity Authority and Power System Operation Corporation Limited (POSOCO).
by beverages, wearing apparel, furniture, printing and The manufacturing purchasing managers’ index
reproduction of recorded media and other transport (PMI) improved from 54.4 in Q1 to 56.3 in Q2
equipment. In terms of the use-based classification, (56.4 in July and 56.2 in August) due to a pick-up in
all categories expanded y-o-y during April-July. The sales, capacity enhancements, and product
production of capital goods posted double-digit growth, diversification (Chart III.26a).
indicative of revival in investment activity. Consumer
Overall, manufacturing, primary goods, infrastructure
durables output also rose strongly, benefitting from
& construction and capital goods sectors have
the recovery in private consumption, especially urban
demand.
Chart III.25: Manufacturing Sector Profitability
Electricity generation rose by 17.6 per cent (y-o-y) in
Q1:2022-23 (15.3 per cent above the pre-pandemic
level). Thermal and renewable sources expanded by
17.7 per cent and 28.3 per cent, respectively. In Q2
(July-August), overall electricity generation growth
moderated to 2.7 per cent, partly due to abundant
rainfall (Chart III.24a). Region-wise, electricity demand
remained broad-based during H1 (Chart III.24b).
The nominal GVA of listed manufacturing companies
sustained a healthy expansion on the back of higher
profits and staff costs (Chart III.25). According to
the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook survey, the
Note: Data for Q1:2022-23 are based on results of 1,707 listed private
manufacturing sector’s optimism waned marginally
manufacturing companies.
Source: RBI staff estimates based on data published by listed companies.
in Q2:2022-23.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart III.26: PMI Manufacturing and Services
a: PMI Manufacturing b: PMI Services
Note: >50: Expansion, < 50: Contraction.
Source: S&P Global.
normalised to pre-pandemic levels while consumer electricity generation, passenger vehicles and
goods are trailing (Table III.7). Amongst major two-wheelers indicate buoyancy and are above their
sub-sectors, steel consumption, cement production, 2019-20 output levels.
Table III.7: Industrial Sector: Progress towards Normalisation
(Ratio to the respective month/quarter of 2019-2020)
Indicators 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 July Aug
I Industrial Production
PMI: Manufacturing (>50 indicates growth over previous month) 35.1 51.6 57.2 56.9 51.5 53.8 56.3 54.3 54.4 56.4 56.2
II Index of Industrial Production 64 94 102 106 93 103 104 108 105 102
IIP: Manufacturing 60 94 102 107 91 102 103 108 103 101
IIP: Capital goods 35 87 99 109 74 102 97 111 96 107
IIP: Infrastructure & construction goods 53 98 105 110 98 110 109 117 108 107
IIP: Consumer durables goods 32 90 107 118 72 99 103 111 92 93
IIP: Consumer non-durables goods 83 100 103 105 98 101 103 102 99 98
IIIEight Core Industries Index 76 95 100 103 96 104 105 109 109 106
ECI: Steel 51 100 103 113 97 108 105 118 103 108
ECI: Cement 62 89 96 110 97 110 104 119 114 107
Electricity demand 84 99 106 108 98 108 110 113 116 110 117
IV Production of Automobiles
Passenger vehicles 16 94 120 123 83 95 100 120 106 121 125
Two wheelers 22 95 118 129 60 89 91 102 83 87 100
Three wheelers 23 45 66 84 61 60 67 83 64 71 77
Tractors 60 123 162 153 133 143 118 99 152 145 141
Sources: CMIE; CEIC; NSO; SIAM; and RBI staff estimates.
 Below pre-Covid level Normalisation / recovery of activity 

Chapter III Demand and Output
III.2.3 Services exceeded pre-pandemic levels in May-June 2022
but dipped marginally below in July-August.
Services sector GVA rose by 17.5 per cent y-o-y in
Transportation activity remained robust in H1 –
Q1:2022-23 (2.8 per cent above the pre-pandemic
commercial vehicle sales more than doubled y-o-y in
level), supported by sustained recovery in contact-
Q1, while railway freight traffic posted a growth of
intensive activities, and improving consumer
11.8 per cent in Q1 and 8.1 per cent in Q2 (up to
confidence and business sentiment (Chart III.27a).
Trade, hotels, transport, communication, and other August). Port cargo traffic rose by 9.2 per cent in Q1
services were resuscitated by increased resumption and 11.6 per cent in Q2 (up to August) on the back of
of operations and pent-up demand, but still remained buoyant international trade (Table III.9). Passenger
below the pre-pandemic level by 15.5 per cent. air traffic expanded by 206.2 per cent in Q1 and 74.1
per cent in Q2 (up to August) on improving tourism
High frequency indicators suggest a continued
as well as business-related travels (Table III.9).
broadening of traction in services activity
(Table III.8). GST collections and issuances of e-way Growth in financial, real estate and professional
bills – indicators of wholesale and retail trade and services improved to 9.2 per cent in Q1:2022-23
underlying overall economic activity – remained above from 2.3 per cent a year ago, aided by a revival in real
pre-pandemic levels for the fourteenth straight month estate and the buoyancy in financial services. Bank
in August. Construction sector activity remained credit growth accelerated to 16.2 per cent (y-o-y) as on
healthy in H1, as reflected by cement production and September 9, extending support to financial services.
steel consumption, benefitting from government’s
In the real estate sector, new launches reached a
continued focus on boosting infrastructure and
25-quarter high in Q1 and sales were at the highest
improving real estate activity (Chart III.27b).
in 10 quarters but still trailed pre-pandemic levels
Travel and hospitality services recovered in Q1, (Chart III.28a). Housing prices grew by 3.5 per cent
with increased discretionary spending and pent- (y-o-y) in Q1:2022-23, according to the RBI’s all-India
up demand. The hotel industry occupancy levels housing price index, led by Chennai and Mumbai
Chart III.27: Services Sector
a: Service Sector Components b: Construction Indicators
Sources: Office of Economic Adviser, Joint Plant Committee, Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, Ministry of Commerce & Industry.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Table III.8: Services Sector: Progress towards Normalisation
(Ratio to the respective month/quarter of 2019-2020)
Indicators 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Jul Aug
PMI: Services (>50 indicates growth over previous month) 17.2 41.9 53.4 54.2 47.2 52.4 57.3 52.3 58.7 55.5 57.2
I Construction
Steel consumption 49 93 114 123 99 93 107 122 109 106 101
Cement production 62 89 96 110 97 110 104 119 114 107
II Trade, hotels, transport, communication and services related to broadcasting
Commercial vehicle sales 15 80 99 143 51 99 100 170 108
Domestic air passenger traffic 7 25 50 72 31 53 81 77 95 83 87
Domestic air cargo 26 68 90 105 78 86 92 101 103 98 91
International air cargo 43 77 87 101 94 96 100 103 92 91 90
Freight traffic 79 105 111 113 110 118 119 121 123 122 131
Port cargo 80 91 103 107 102 97 104 106 111 107 109
Toll collection: volume 184 349 295 174 548 699 513 259 1035 973 979
Petroleum consumption 74 88 101 100 85 93 98 105 100 98 104
GST E-way bill 50 100 115 128 98 127 128 140 143 145 153
GST revenue 59 92 108 114 106 118 130 133 144 146 146
III Financial, real estate and professional services
Credit outstanding y-o-y growth (per cent) 6.2 5.2 6.6 5.6 5.8 6.7 9.3 9.6 13.2 14.5 15.5
Bank deposits y-o-y growth (per cent) 11.0 10.5 11.5 11.4 10.3 9.4 10.3 8.9 8.3 9.1 9.5
Life insurance first year premium 81 116 97 135 87 122 107 169 122 182 139
Non-life insurance premium 95 105 104 115 107 118 113 127 133 163 153
Note: Bank credit growth since December 3, 2021 is adjusted for past reporting errors by select scheduled commercial banks (SCBs).
Sources: CMIE; CEIC; NSO; MOSPI; IRDAI; RBI staff estimates.
 Below pre-Covid level Normalisation / recovery of activity 
(Chart III.28). Public administration, defence and in Q1:2022-23 (6.2 per cent a year ago), aided by other
other services (PADO) increased by 26.3 per cent y-o-y services (education, health, recreation and cultural,
Chart III.28: Housing Sector – Launches, Sales and Prices
a: Housing Activity b: Housing Price Index of RBI
Sources: PropTiger and RBI.

Chapter III Demand and Output
etc) even as government consumption recorded optimism propelled discretionary spending, demand
muted growth. for contact-intensive activities, and investment
activity. Looking ahead, good progress under kharif
The PMI services remained in expansion zone in
sowing, adequate reservoir levels, Government’s
H1. After easing from 58.7 in Q1 to 55.5 in July, it
continued thrust on capex, improved capacity
rebounded to 57.2 in August (Chart III.27b). The
utilisation in manufacturing, pick-up in non-food
Composite PMI index was 58.0 in Q1 and 57.4 in Q2
credit and waning COVID-19 infections should support
(July-August).
aggregate demand and activity in H2. Geopolitical
III.3 Conclusion
tensions, tightening of global financial markets and
Domestic economic activity was resilient in global economic slowdown, however, pose downside
H1:2022-23. Consumer confidence and business risks to the domestic outlook.

IV. Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
During H1:2022-23, domestic financial markets adjusted smoothly to the shift in monetary policy stance and
exhibited resilience to global financial market headwinds and policy spillovers from AEs. Market rates have
moved higher and bank credit offtake has improved. Going forward, the RBI will remain vigilant, agile and
nimble in its liquidity management operations and would use all instruments at its disposal to mitigate the
spillovers of global financial market volatility on domestic financial markets.
Introduction liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) corridor on April 8,
2022 at 40 basis points above the fixed rate reverse
During H1:2022-23, global financial markets
repo (FRRR) provided initial momentum. On average,
experienced surges of volatility in the cross currents of
the weighted average call rate (WACR) traded 2 basis
geopolitical hostilities and aggressive monetary policy
points (bps) below the SDF rate in H1:2022-23 (April
actions and stances across jurisdictions to combat
elevated inflation pressures. As financial conditions 8 - September 27), as compared with 2 bps below the
tightened, bond yields hardened and stock markets FRRR in H2:2021-22 (Chart IV.1). Transient liquidity
plunged in H1 as mounting recession fears unnerved tightness due to higher tax outflows and the resultant
investor sentiments. In the currency markets, the build-up of government cash balances temporarily
US dollar strengthened against major global peers firmed up the WACR above the policy repo rate in the
to a 20-year high by early-September, buoyed by the fourth week of July and the second half of September.
Fed’s front-loaded rate hikes, quantitative tightening, Liquidity injection through variable rate repo (VRR)
and rising safe haven demand. These developments auctions mitigated the temporary liquidity stress.
triggered portfolio outflows from emerging market
In the overnight call money segment, the weighted
economies (EMEs) and imposed sharp depreciation
average rate (WAR) of traded deals was 18 bps above
pressures on their currencies, exacerbating risks to
macroeconomic and financial stability. Chart IV.1: Liquidity, Policy Corridor and WACR
IV.1 Domestic Financial Markets
Domestic financial markets were impacted by global
spillovers recurringly, especially in the equities and
forex segments. Money markets remained relatively
insulated although interest rates hardened in response
to the withdrawal of monetary accommodation
domestically. Bond yields eased from mid-June highs
but hardened intermittently.
IV.1.1 Money Market
Money market rates firmed up during H1:2022-23,
reflecting policy repo rate increases by the RBI and the
reduction in surplus liquidity. The institution of the
Source: Reserve Bank of India (RBI).
standing deposit facility (SDF) rate as the floor of the

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.2: Traded and Reported Deals in the Call Money Market – Volume and Rate
a: Rate b: Monthly Volume
Sources: Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL); RBI.
the SDF rate while that of reported deals1 was 30 bps share of mutual funds (MFs) – the major lenders in the
below during H1:2022-23 (April 8 - September 26), collateralised segment – in market repo declined to 46
reflecting market segmentation as small cooperative per cent from 56 per cent, partly because of reduced
banks – principal lenders in reported deals – brought inflows under debt mutual funds (up to August). MFs’
in funds at lower rates towards the close of market share in TREPS at 72 per cent in H1 was, however,
hours (Chart IV.2a). The average monthly volume
of traded deals at `1.39 lakh crore was higher Chart IV.3: Share in Overnight
Money Market Volumes
than `1.01 lakh crore in the reported segment
(Chart IV.2b). The share of reported deals in the total
call money market volume declined to about 34 per
cent in September 2022 from 68 per cent in March
2022, due to increased participation by public sector
and foreign banks.
Money market activity remained dominated by
the collateralised segments with the share of the
uncollateralised call money market remaining at 2.0
per cent in H1:2022-23 (up to September 27). The
share of triparty repo (TREPS) moderated to 73 per
cent from 76 per cent a year ago, with a corresponding
increase in the share of market repo to 25 per cent
Sources: CCIL; RBI.
from 22 per cent (Chart IV.3). Among investors, the
1 ‘Traded deals’ are negotiated directly on the NDS-Call platform whereas ‘reported deals’ are over-the-counter (OTC) deals which are reported on the
NDS-Call platform after the completion of negotiation of deals.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
unchanged. On the borrowing side, the share of public
Chart IV.4: Money Market Rates and
sector banks (PSBs) increased to 66 per cent from 64 Policy Corridor
per cent in TREPS and to 19 per cent from 16 per cent
in market repo over the same period.
Interest rates on longer-term money market
instruments – 3-month T-bills (TBs), certificates of
deposit (CDs) and commercial paper (CPs) – moved
higher during H1:2022-23. The spreads of TBs, CDs
and CPs were 51 bps, 72 bps and 87 bps, respectively,
above the SDF rate in H1:2022-23 (April 8 - September
26) as against 26 bps, 38 bps and 88 bps, respectively,
above the FRRR during H2:2021-22 (Chart IV.4).
The issuances of CDs increased to `2.96 lakh crore
in H1:2022-23 (up to September 23) from `1.73 lakh
crore in H2:2021-22, reflecting banks’ demand for Sources: FBIL and RBI.
funds to meet the buoyant credit offtake. Mobilisation
of resources through the issuances of CPs, however, issuances firmed up to 5.50 per cent in H1:2022-
fell to `7.20 lakh crore during H1:2022-23 (up to 23 from 4.47 per cent in H2:2021-22. Corporates
September 26) from `10.09 lakh crore in H2:2021-22 remained the major issuers of CPs, with their share
(Chart IV.5a), as the appetite for bank credit improved. increasing to 60.2 per cent in H1:2022-23 from 53.3
The weighted average discount rate (WADR) of CP per cent in H2:2021-22 (Chart IV.5b).
Chart IV.5: Primary Issuances of Commercial Paper
a: Systemic Liquidity, Issuances and WADR b: Institutional Break-up
Sources: RBI; CCIL;F-TRAC; and RBI staff estimates.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
by 64 bps during Q1, driven by (i) the rise in US yields
Table IV.1: Maturity Profile of CP Issuances
and crude prices; (ii) the announcement of a larger
(` lakh crore)
than anticipated Central Government borrowing
Tenor H1: 2021-22 H2: 2021-22 H1: 2022-23 (up
to September 26) auction calendar for H1:2022-23; (iii) higher than
7- 30 days 4.13 4.14 0.69 expected March and April CPI inflation prints; and
31-90 days 3.12 3.30 3.93
(iv) the repo rate hike of 40 bps in an unscheduled
91-180 days 2.05 1.82 1.84
181-365 days 0.80 0.83 0.74 meeting in May along with the 50 bps hike in the cash
Total 10.11 10.09 7.20
reserve ratio (CRR) (Box IV.1).
Outstanding 3.71 3.52 4.33
(as at end-period)
In Q2 (up to September 27), the benchmark yield
Sources: CCIL;F-Trac and RBI.
softened by 20 bps owing to the fall in crude prices,
lower CPI inflation for July vis-à-vis June, the return
Most of the CP issuances were in the 31-90 days
of foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) as net buyers in
maturity segment (Table IV.1). The WADR of issuances
August-September and expectations of India’s likely
in this maturity segment firmed up to 5.45 per cent in
inclusion in global bond indices. Reflecting these
H1:2022-23 (up to September 26) from 3.97 per cent
factors, the 10-year yield moderated from its peak
in H2:2021-22.
of 7.66 per cent (on June 16, 2022) to 7.09 per cent
IV.1.2 Government Securities (G-sec) Market
on September 13; it, however, rose to 7.30 per cent
During H1:2022-23, G-sec yields exhibited two-way on September 27, 2022 reflecting policy rate hikes by
movements (Chart IV.6). The generic 10-yr yield rose major central banks and higher global bond yields.
Chart IV.6: 10-year Generic G-sec Yield, Repo Rate and Liquidity Conditions
Higher than US FOMC raised rates by 75 bps
expected H1
borrowing
Higher CPI
Sources: RBI and FBIL.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Box IV.1: Monetary Policy Surprises and Financial Markets
Efficient financial markets are believed to price in the change/monetary policy surprise; is the anticipated
anticipated component of policy actions. In order to assess policy change; D toD are dummies to capture major
1 4
the true impact of policy announcements on the market policy developments3; refers to the change in
interest rates, it is essential to segregate the surprise Brent crude prices; and refers to
element (which the market might not have been able to the corresponding changes in US rates one day prior to
predict) from the anticipated component of monetary the policy announcement.
policy (Kuttner, 2001). High frequency financial market
The empirical analysis indicates that anticipated policy
variables such as overnight indexed swaps (OIS), futures
changes are not significant for 10-year government
and stock prices can be used to identify policy surprises
securities and 5-year corporate bonds – only the surprise
(Gertler and Karadi, 2015).
element has an impact on the yields of these securities
Akin to the global evidence, the OIS is found to reliably
(Table IV.1.1). The cumulative effect at the end of 2 days
capture market expectations of the future path of the
is higher (and significant) than the same day impact,
policy rate in India. Monetary policy surprises are
suggesting that the markets take time to absorb policy
identified by using the change in the 2-month OIS rate
(given the bi-monthly policy cycle) on the policy day,
Table IV.1.1: Policy Impact on Financial Markets
while the residual is assumed to be the anticipated policy
change. By narrowing the window around the policy Variables 91-days T-bill 10-year G-sec AAA 5-year
Corp. bonds
announcement day, the change in the OIS rate can be
1 day 2 days 1 day 2 days 1 day 2 days
reasonably attributed to monetary policy surprises. The effect effect effect effect effect effect
change in the 2-month OIS rate on policy days may also (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
contain a surprise on the path of expected future policy Surprise 0.721*** 1.094*** 0.284*** 0.792*** 0.875*** 1.060***
rates provided by the central bank’s forward guidance. (0.153) (0.121) (0.072) (0.224) (0.196) (0.221)
Anticipated 0.216*** 0.211*** 0.025 0.005 0.011 0.001
This policy surprise is identified by splitting the change
(0.053) (0.039) (0.033) (0.067) (0.033) (0.071)
in policy rate/monetary policy decision into two parts D 0.119*** 0.240*** 0.101*** 0.030 0.076*** 0.095***

(0.012) (0.013) (0.008) (0.022) (0.012) (0.022)
– anticipated and unanticipated policy change (eq. 1)
D -0.599*** -0.434*** 0.049 -0.057 -0.141*** -0.069**
(Ahokpossi et al., 2020) – as follows: 2 (0.047) (0.061) (0.029) (0.067) (0.020) (0.032)
D 0.139*** 0.145*** 0.052*** 0.169*** 0.248*** 0.260***

(0.013) (0.037) (0.016) (0.030) (0.018) (0.017)
… (1),
D -0.172*** -0.262*** 0.024 0.023 0.056 0.018

(0.054) (0.038) (0.035) (0.084) (0.053) (0.087)
where, i is the policy rate, t is the time index and is
Change in -0.010 -0.024*** 0.000 0.000 0.001 0.010
the market expectation at time t-1 of the policy rate at time Brent prices (0.009) (0.008) (0.008) (0.012) (0.009) (0.011)
t. is the change in the policy rate which is bifurcated Change in 0.063 -0.405 - - - -
US 91-days (0.336) (0.330)
into an unanticipated component ( ) and an anticipated T-bill, lag 1
portion ( ). The hypothesis that only the unanticipated Change in US - - - - 0.161 -0.070
5-years G-sec, (0.304) (0.272)
decisions/surprises may have a significant impact on lag 1
market rates is put to test for the key markets (91-days Change in - - 0.258 -0.127 - -
US 10-years (0.160) (0.373)
Treasury Bills, 10-years G-sec and AAA rated 5-years
G-sec, lag 1
corporate bonds) in an event study (ES) framework2, using Constant -0.036*** -0.027** -0.011* -0.006 -0.017 -0.018
(0.011) (0.010) (0.006) (0.015) (0.010) (0.013)
the following specification:
Observations 37 37 37 37 37 37
Adjusted R2 0.861 0.896 0.310 0.518 0.698 0.626
LM test 0.69 0.81 0.03 0.10 0.16 0.03
(p-value)
… (2)
Note: Figures in parentheses refer to the Newey-West standard errors
where, is the change in market interest rates (corrected for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation).
***,**,* denote levels of significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
(dependent variable); is the unanticipated policy
Source: RBI staff estimates.
(Contd.)
2 The sample period covers the flexible inflation targeting (FIT) regime (October 2016 – August 2022).
3 D refers to the dummy for the April 6, 2017 policy meeting when the RBI narrowed the width of the LAF corridor from 100 bps to 50 bps; D refers to
1 2
the dummy for the March 27, 2020 meeting when policy measures were announced through an off-cycle meeting after the outbreak of the pandemic; D

refers to the dummy for the April 8, 2022 meeting when the RBI instituted the SDF; and D refers to the dummy for an off-cycle meeting on May 4, 2022

when the RBI announced increase in the policy repo rate by 40 bps and CRR by 50 bps.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
surprises. In the case of treasury bills, while both surprise Market”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 47, Issue
as well as anticipated policy changes matter, the surprise 10, pp. 523-544.
component is the major driver. Overall, interest rates in
Gertler, M., and Karadi, P. (2015), “Monetary Policy
money and bond markets in India are found to respond
Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity”, American
significantly mainly to policy surprises in conformity with
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 7(1), pp. 44-76.
the efficient market hypothesis.
Ahokpossi, C., Isnawangsih, A., Naoaj, M. S., and Yan, T.
References: (2020), “The Impact of Monetary Policy Communication
Kuttner, K. N. (2001), “Monetary Policy Surprises and in an Emerging Economy: The Case of Indonesia”, IMF
Interest Rates: Evidence from the Fed Funds Futures Working Paper, WP/20/109.
Yields on T-bills firmed up across tenors in sync The dynamics of yield curve movements are captured
with the increases in the policy repo rate and the by its level, slope, and curvature4. While the average
introduction of the SDF (Chart IV.7). level of yields hardened by 64 bps, the slope flattened
by 206 bps during H1:2022-23 (up to September 26)
Average trading volume in both G-secs and T-bills
increased year-on-year in H1:2022-23 (up to September due to relatively higher increase in the short-term
26) (Chart IV.8). The weighted average yield of traded rates consequent to policy tightening (Chart IV.9).
maturities for G-sec and T-bills increased by 95 bps Alongside, the curvature declined perceptibly by 190
and 144 bps, respectively. bps indicating a reduction in the hump of the curve,
Chart IV.7: FBIL -T-Bill Benchmark (Yield to Maturity)
Source: FBIL.
4 The level is the average of par yields of all tenors up to 30-years published by FBIL and the slope (term spread) is the difference in par yields of 3-months
and 30-year maturities. The curvature is calculated as twice the 14-year yield minus the sum of 30-year and 3-month yields.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart IV.8: Trading Volumes and Yield
a: G-Sec b: T-Bills
Sources: CCIL and RBI staff estimates.
as the yield hardening in the mid-segment of the To facilitate debt consolidation, the Reserve Bank
curve was less than in the short and long segments. conducted six switch auctions on behalf of the Central
Government amounting to `56,103 crore during
In the Indian context, unlike the AEs, the level and
H1:2022-23 (up to September 27, 2022). The weighted
curvature of the yield curve have more information
average maturity (WAM) of the outstanding stock
content on future macroeconomic outcomes than the
of G-sec increased to 11.94 years as on September
slope.5
Chart IV.9: G-Sec Yield Curve
a: Shifts b: Changes in Level and Slope
Sources: FBIL and RBI staff estimates.
5 Patra, M.D., Joice, J., Kushwaha, K.M., and I. Bhattacharyya (2022). What is the Yield Curve telling us about the Economy? Reserve Bank of India Bulletin,
June.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
to September 27) (Chart IV.10). The average inter-state
Chart IV.10: SGS - Amount Raised and Spread
spread on securities of 10-year tenor (fresh issuances)
was 3 bps in H1:2022-23 (4 bps in H2:2021-22).
IV.1.3 Corporate Bond Market
Corporate bond yields moved higher in H1, broadly
tracking G-sec yields. The average yield on AAA-
rated 3-year bonds issued by non-banking financial
companies (NBFCs) and corporates increased by 156
bps (to 7.52 per cent) and by 170 bps (to 7.56 per
cent), respectively, in H1:2022-23 (up to September
27). The yield on issuances by public sector
undertakings (PSUs), financial institutions (FIs) and
banks rose by 143 bps to 7.25 per cent (Chart IV.11a).
The average risk premium (measured by spread over
Source: RBI.
3-year G-sec yields) increased from 35 bps to 41 bps
for NBFCs, from 25 bps to 45 bps for corporates while
27, 2022 from 11.71 years at end-March 2022. The it moderated from 21 bps to 14 bps for PSUs, FIs and
weighted average coupon (WAC) at 7.15 per cent banks (Chart IV.11b).
during H1 (up to September 27) remained higher than
The increase in risk premia was seen in other tenors
7.11 per cent as at end-March 2022.
(albeit more at longer segments) and rating spectrum
The weighted average spread of cut-off yields on as well (Table IV.2). The 3-year credit default swap
state government securities (SGS) over G-sec yields of (CDS) spreads for the papers trading overseas of State
comparable maturities was 32 bps in H1:2022-23 (up Bank of India and ICICI Bank increased by 32 bps
Chart IV.11: AAA-rated 3-Year Corporate Bond Yield and Spread: Sector-wise
a: Yields b: Spreads
Source: Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA).

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
mobilisation in the corporate bond market (98.4
Table IV.2: Financial Markets - Rates and Spread
per cent) was through the private placement route.
Instrument Interest Rates Spread (bps) (over
(per cent) corresponding risk-free Outstanding investments by FPIs in corporate bonds
rate)
declined to `1.16 lakh crore on September 27, 2022
Mar Sep Variation Mar Sep Variation
2022 2022 (in bps) 2022 2022 (in bps) from `1.21 lakh crore at end-March, pulling down the
1 2 3 (4 = 3-2) 5 6 (7 = 6-5) utilisation of the approved limits from 19.9 per cent
Corporate Bonds
to 18.3 per cent. The daily average secondary market
(i) AAA (1-yr) 5.03 6.84 181 28 13 -15
(ii) AAA (3-yr) 5.86 7.56 170 25 45 20 trading volume during Q1 at `6,054 crore was 20 per
(iii) AAA (5-yr) 6.43 7.50 107 -1 22 23 cent below its level in the corresponding period of the
(iv) AA (3-yr) 6.57 8.31 174 96 120 24
previous year (Chart IV.12b).
(v) BBB-minus (3-yr) 10.24 11.97 173 463 486 23
Note: Yields and spreads are computed as monthly averages. Data up to
IV.1.4 Equity Market
September 27, 2022.
Source: FIMMDA.
Domestic equity market registered minor losses
in H1: 2022-23, exhibiting greater resilience
and 33 bps, respectively during H1: 2022-23 (up to
than most of its global peers (Chart IV.13a). The
September 27, 2022).
benchmark indices bounced off their multi-month
The issuances of corporate bonds in the primary market
lows registered in June 2022 as the correction in
increased to `1.94 lakh crore during H1 (up to August commodity prices, good progress of the monsoon,
2022) from `1.81 lakh crore during the corresponding healthy corporate earnings results and return of FPI
period of 2021-22 (Chart IV.12a), compensating for the flows restored investors’ confidence. However, the
lack of overseas issuances as against `55,152 crore US Fed's 75 bps policy rate hike in September 2022
raised abroad in H1:2021-22. Nearly the entire resource along with its hawkish stance led to a global sell-off
Chart IV.12: Corporate Bond Market Activity
a: Primary Market Issuances b: Secondary Market Turnover - Daily Average
Source: SEBI.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.13: Stock Market Performance
a: Global Equity Market Performance
b: Share of Global Equity Markets to World Market c: India VIX
Capitalisation (Per cent)
Source: Bloomberg.
in equity markets. Overall, the BSE Sensex declined consecutive months (October 2021-June 2022), the
by 2.5 per cent in H1:2022-23 (up to September 27, longest selling streak since 2000. Foreign investors,
2022) to close at 57,108. Indian equities account for however, returned to the domestic equity market
3.5 per cent of total world market capitalisation, in July, attracted by the improvement in corporate
the fifth largest in the world (Chart IV.13b). The earnings and strong macro fundamentals. Domestic
India VIX – which captures the short-term expected institutional investors (DIIs) made heavy purchases in
volatility of Nifty 50 – fell from its 20-month high of the equity market for 17 consecutive months (March
32.0 on February 24, 2022 to 21.6 on September 27,
2021-July 2022), absorbing FPI sell-off pressures
2022 (Chart IV.13c).
and enabling the market to outperform global and
EMEs as an asset class experienced selling other emerging market peers. Overall, FPIs were net
pressures from FPIs in 2022 amidst heightened sellers to the tune of `58,438 crore, while DIIs were
geopolitical tensions and rapid monetary policy net buyers to the tune of `1.3 lakh crore in H1:2022-
normalisation by global central banks (Chart IV.14a). 23 (Chart IV.14b). Moreover, activity in the domestic
In India, equity markets witnessed sell-offs for nine primary market remained subdued in H1:2022-23

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart IV.14: EME flows, Institutional Investments and IPO Issuances in India
a: EME FPI Flows and Volatility
b: Net Investment in Indian Equities by c: Amount Raised through IPOs/FPOs
Institutional Investors
Sources: Institute of International Finance, Bloomberg, Capitaline, NSDL and SEBI.
(barring the mega LIC IPO) due to volatile conditions 4.8 per cent during H2:2021-22 (Chart IV.15b). Market
(Chart IV.14c). interventions by the RBI contained volatility and
ensured orderly movement of the INR. The Reserve
IV.1.5. Foreign Exchange Market
Bank announced several measures on July 6, 2022 to
The Indian rupee (INR) traded with a depreciating enhance capital inflows with the objective of ensuring
bias against the US dollar (USD) in H1:2022-23 overall macroeconomic and financial stability.7
(Chart IV.15a). Reflecting the global factors, the INR
During 2022-23 (up to September 27), the US dollar
volatility – measured by the 1-month at the money
appreciated by 16.1 per cent against a basket of major
(ATM) option implied volatility6 – rose to an average currencies while the INR depreciated by a lower order
of 5.25 per cent during H1 (up to September 27) from of 6.8 per cent against the US dollar (Chart IV.16),
6 Implied volatility is derived from an option’s price and depicts the markets’ expectations about the future volatility of the currency.
7 These measures included temporary exemption from CRR and statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) on incremental FCNR(B) and NRE term deposits, permitting
banks temporarily to raise fresh FCNR(B) and NRE deposits without reference to the extant regulations on interest rates effective July 7, 2022, increase in
limit under automatic route for external commercial borrowing and relaxations pertaining to FPI investment norms in debt market and foreign currency
lending by authorised dealer category I (AD Cat-I) banks.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.15: INR - US Dollar Movements
a: Movements of Indian Rupee and US Dollar b: 1-month ATM Implied Volatility
Sources: FBIL; Bloomberg; and Thomson Reuters.
faring better than many AEs and EME peers. The INR’s inflation is lower than the weighted average of its
relatively better performance is attributed to stronger major trading partners8. Despite a drawdown, India’s
macroeconomic fundamentals and buffers – India’s foreign exchange reserves at US$ 537.5 billion (as on
Chart IV.16: Cross-Currency Movements
a: Movement of Major EME Currencies against US Dollar b: Movement in REER
(September 26, 2022 over end-March 2022) (August 2022 over March 2022)
Sources: RBI; FBIL; IMF; Thomson Reuters; and Bank for International Settlements (BIS).
8 In the 40-currency REER, trading partners account for 91 per cent of India’s merchandise trade, 88.4 per cent of world GDP and 86.4 per cent of world
trade. In August 2022, India’s inflation was 0.8 percentage point lower than these 40 trading partners.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
September 23) are the fifth largest globally9 which,
Table IV.3: Nominal and Real Effective Exchange
in conjunction with net forward purchases, provide
Rate Indices (Trade-weighted)
insulation from external shocks and resilience. (Base: 2015-16 = 100)
In terms of the 40-currency nominal effective Item Index: Appreciation (+) /
exchange rate (NEER), the INR appreciated by 0.2 per September 23, Depreciation (-) (Per cent)
2022 (P)
cent between March 2022 and September 23, 2022 September 23, 2022 over
March (average) 2022
(Table IV.3). It also appreciated by 1.1 per cent in terms
40-currency REER 104.6 1.1
of the 40-currency real effective exchange rate (REER)
40-currency NEER 92.9 0.2
during this period.
6-currency REER 104.7 3.7
6-currency NEER 88.0 1.8
Forward premia declined during H1 reflecting
`/US$* 81.37 -6.3
narrowing interest rate differentials on the back of
*: As on September 27, 2022.
a faster than expected tightening by the US Fed. The P: Provisional.
Sources: RBI; and FBIL.
one-month forward premium averaged 3.36 per cent
during H1 (up to September 27) down from 3.93 per
Although credit growth (y-o-y) picked up for both
cent during H2:2021-22 (Chart IV.17).
public sector banks (PSBs) and private sector banks
IV.1.6 Credit Market
(PVBs) in H1:2022-23, it remained higher for PVBs
During H1:2022-23, bank credit10 growth accelerated (20.4 per cent vis-à-vis 13.9 per cent for PSBs)
in tandem with improving economic activity. Growth (Chart IV.19a). The share of PSBs in total incremental
in non-food bank credit increased to 16.7 per cent credit extended by all scheduled commercial banks
(y-o-y) as on September 9, 2022 from 9.7 per cent as at (SCBs) on a y-o-y basis, however, was higher than that
end-March 2022 (Chart IV.18). of PVBs (Chart IV.19b).
Chart IV.17: Forward Premium Movements Chart IV.18: Non-food Credit Growth of SCBs
Source: Bloomberg. Source: RBI.
9 Comparison based on data available up to September 16, 2022.
10 Bank credit growth and related variations/ratios for all fortnights since December 3, 2021 are adjusted for past reporting errors by select scheduled
commercial banks (SCBs).

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.19: Credit Flow across Bank-Groups
a: Growth b: Share in Incremental Credit
Source: RBI.
The improvement in bank credit was seen across all normal monsoon and the enhanced target for
major sectors11 (Chart IV.20). Credit to the agriculture agricultural credit12.
sector grew by 13.4 per cent (y-o-y) in August 2022 Credit growth to industry recovered to 11.4 cent
(13.0 per cent a year ago), supported by the above- in August from 1.5 per cent a year ago, led by large
Chart IV.20: Sectoral Deployment of Bank Credit
a: Sector-wise Credit Growth b: Share in Incremental Non-food Credit (y-o-y)
Source: RBI.
11 Sectoral non-food credit data are based on sector-wise and industry-wise bank credit (SIBC) return, which covers select banks accounting for about 93
per cent of total non-food credit extended by all SCBs.
12 The government raised the agriculture credit target of `16.5 lakh crore for 2021-22 to `18 lakh crore for 2022-23.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
industry and sustained growth in the micro, small ago. Credit growth to infrastructure was driven by the
and medium enterprises (MSME) segment. Credit to power sector, reflecting strong growth in electricity
large industries expanded by 6.4 per cent in August, generation (Chart IV.21c and d).
after remaining in contraction zone for a substantial
After witnessing a slide during the COVID-19
period, due to higher working capital requirements
pandemic, services sector credit offtake gained traction
and industrial activity. The extension of the Emergency
in H1:2022-23, led by disbursements to NBFCs (which
Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECGLS) helped push up
registered 27.8 per cent growth in August 2022 as
credit growth in respect of micro and small industries
against contraction of 1.0 per cent a year ago). Credit
to 28.2 per cent in August 2022 from 12.1 per cent
growth in contact intensive sectors such as tourism,
a year ago, with incremental credit (y-o-y) flows to
hotels and restaurants remained broadly stable
MSMEs exceeding that to large industry (Chart IV.21a
(Chart IV.22).
and b). Among the major industries, credit growth
to the infrastructure sector (accounting for 38.0 per Retail loans remained the major driver of overall credit
cent of outstanding industrial credit) accelerated to growth. Within retail loans, growth in housing loans
11.0 per cent in August 2022 from 3.3 per cent a year was sturdy (16.4 per cent in August 2022 as compared
Chart IV.21: Bank Credit in Industry Sector – Size-wise and Type-wise
a: Credit Growth - Size-wise b: Incremental Credit
c: Credit Growth to Industrial Sector - d: Credit Growth-Infrastructure Sector
Major Constituents
Source: RBI.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.22: Credit Growth in Services Sector
a: Credit Growth in Major Components of b: Growth in Bank Credit to NBFCs
Services Sector
Source: RBI.
with 11.6 per cent a year ago) while vehicle loans per cent in June 2022 from 7.5 per cent a year ago
strengthened (19.5 per cent in August 2022 vis-à-vis (Chart IV.24a). Asset quality improved across all the
11.1 per cent a year ago). Credit card loans bounced major sectors (Chart IV.24b).
back in H1:2022-23 with the ebbing of new COVID-19
Banks’ non-SLR investments – covering instruments
infections and the rebound in consumer demand
like CPs, bonds, debentures and shares of public
(Chart IV.23).
and private corporates – were lower during
The asset quality of SCBs improved, with the overall H1:2022-23, mainly due to a decline in investment
non-performing assets (NPA) ratio declining to 5.6 in bonds/debentures (Chart IV.25a). Adjusted
Chart IV.23: Personal Loans Growth
Source: RBI.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart IV.24: Stressed Assets and Non-Performing Assets of SCBs
a: Overall Loan Portfolio of SCBs b: Sectoral Non-Performing Assets
Source: RBI.
non-food credit13 growth at 14.9 per cent as on demand and time liabilities (NDTL) as on August
September 9 (y-o-y basis) was higher than 9.1 per 26, 2022 from 10.4 per cent at end-March 2022
cent as at end-March 2022 (Chart IV.25b). (Chart IV.26). Excess SLR holdings provide collateral
Reflecting the improvement in credit offtake, excess buffers to banks for availing funds under the LAF
holdings of statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) securities and are also a component of the liquidity coverage
of SCBs moderated to 8.8 per cent of their net ratio (LCR).
Chart IV.25: Non-SLR Investment and Adjusted Non-Food Credit
a: Non-SLR Investment b: Adjusted Non-Food Credit
*: Up to September 9, 2022.
Source: RBI.
13 Adjusted non-food credit is the sum of non-food credit of banks and their non-SLR investments and captures better the overall flow of funds from the
banks to the commercial sector.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Table IV.4: Transmission from the Repo Rate to Banks’ Deposit and Lending Rates
(Variation in basis points)
Period Repo Term Deposit Rates Lending Rates
Rate
WADTDR WADTDR EBLR 1 - Year WALR WALR
(Fresh Deposits) (Outstanding MCLR (Fresh (Outstanding
Deposits) (Median) Rupee Rupee Loans)
Loans)
Retail Retail and Retail and Bulk
Deposits Bulk Deposits Deposits
February 2019 to March 2022 -250 -209 -259 -188 - -155 -232 -150
April to August/September 2022* +140 39 91 26 140 70 70 39
Of which
April 2022 0 0 -9 0 0 0 -12 -2
May to August/September 2022* +140 39 100 26 140 66 82 41
Note: WALR: Weighted average lending rate; WADTDR: Weighted average domestic term deposit rate; EBLR: External benchmark-based lending rate;
MCLR: Marginal cost of funds-based lending rate.
Data on EBLR pertain to 31 domestic banks.
*: Latest data on WALRs and WADTDRs pertain to August 2022.
Source: RBI.
rates recorded during the easing phase (February
Chart IV.26: Excess SLR of Banks
2019-March 2022) of monetary policy (Table IV.4).
The mandated external benchmark regime introduced
in October 2019 for loan pricing in select sectors has
strengthened the interest rate channel of monetary
transmission. The proportion of outstanding floating
rate loans linked to external benchmarks has increased
from 9.1 per cent in March 2020 to 46.9 per cent in
June 2022. Concurrently, the share of marginal cost
of funds-based lending rate (MCLR) linked loans has
come down to 46.5 per cent in June 2022 (Table IV.5).
The bulk of external benchmark-based lending rate
(EBLR) loans (80 per cent of total in June 2022) are
*: Up to August 2022. linked to the policy repo rate. Accordingly, banks
Source: RBI.
raised their EBLRs for fresh loans by 140 bps during
IV.2 Monetary Policy Transmission Table IV.5: Outstanding Floating Rate Rupee Loans
of SCBs across Interest Rate Benchmarks
Banks’ deposit and lending rates moved higher in (Per cent to total)
H1:2022-23 in tandem with increases in the policy March March March June
2020 2021 2022 2022
repo rate beginning May 2022. The weighted average
Base rate regime 10.3 6.4 4.9 4.3
lending rate (WALR) on fresh rupee loans sanctioned MCLR regime 78.3 62.3 48.6 46.5
during May-August 2022 increased by 82 bps while External benchmark regime 9.1 29.5 44.0 46.9
Others 2.3 1.8 2.5 2.3
that on outstanding rupee loans increased by 41 bps,
Note: Data pertain to 74 scheduled commercial banks.
reversing in part the sizeable moderation in these Source: RBI.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
May-September 2022. The 1-year median MCLR of
Chart IV.27: Bank-wise Lending Rates and Share
SCBs – which is an internal benchmark – rose by
of EBLR linked Loans
70 bps in H1, in line with pressures on their cost of
deposits and other funding sources. The increase
in the share of EBLR-linked loans, the shorter reset
periods of such loans and upward adjustment in
MCLRs have increased the pace of transmission to
WALR on outstanding loans (Chart IV.27).
Across domestic banks, the increase in the WALRs
on fresh rupee loans for PSBs exceeded that of PVBs
during May-August 2022, partly reflecting the higher
share of floating rate loans in the case of the former.
During the easing phase also, the pass-through to
lending rates of PSBs had exceeded that of PVBs
(Chart IV.28 a and b). The lending rates of PSBs
Source: RBI.
Chart IV.28: Bank Group wise Transmission to Lending and Deposit Rates
a: Easing Phase (February 2019-March 2022) b: Tightening Phase (May 2022-August 2022)
c: Lending Rates of Domestic Banks
Source: RBI.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Chart IV.29: Sector wise Transmission to WALRs of Domestic Banks
a: Fresh Rupee Loans
b: Outstanding Rupee Loans
Note: 'Other personal loans' include personal loans other than housing, vehicle, education and credit card loans.
Source: RBI.
remain lower than that of PVBs (Chart IV.28c). The
Table IV.6: Loans linked to External Benchmark –
transmission to lending and deposit rates was the
Spread of WALR (Fresh Loans) over the Repo Rate
maximum in the case of foreign banks, reflecting a (Per cent)
higher share of low cost and lower duration wholesale Sectors March 2022 August 2022
deposits in their total liabilities. Public Private Domestic Public Private Domestic
sector banks banks sector banks banks
The WALRs on both fresh as well as outstanding rupee banks banks
loans increased across all the sectors during May- MSME loans 4.32 4.12 4.23 4.14 3.53 3.76
Personal loans
August 2022 (Chart IV.29).
Housing 2.85 3.47 3.15 2.66 2.43 2.52
Vehicle 3.23 2.79 3.06 3.09 3.21 3.10
The spreads charged by domestic banks over the
Education 4.28 5.45 4.51 4.25 4.64 4.37
policy repo rate (in the case of floating rate fresh rupee
Other personal 3.17 6.06 3.36 3.75 6.39 3.97
loans
loans where the repo rate is the external benchmark)
moderated in case of MSME, housing and education Source: RBI.
loans in H1:2022-23 (Table IV.6).

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Banks also raised their term deposit rates in (Chart IV.30c). The transmission to WADTDR on
H1:2022-23 amidst moderation in systemic liquidity outstanding deposits is also picking up albeit
(Chart IV.30a)14. Banks increased their bulk term gradually, reflecting the preponderance of term
deposit15 rates more relative to retail deposit rates deposits contracted at fixed rates (Table IV.4). The
(Chart IV.30b) - the weighted average domestic term weighted average savings deposit rate of SCBs was 3.0
deposit rate (WADTDR) on fresh retail deposits per cent in August 2022, unchanged from April 202216.
increased by 39 bps during May-August 2022, while Interest rates on various small savings instruments
the WADTDR on total fresh deposits (both retail and (SSIs) – which are fixed on a quarterly basis with a
bulk deposits) increased by 100 bps. The median term spread of 0-100 bps over and above G-sec yields of
deposit rate on fresh retail deposits – the prevailing card comparable maturities – have been revised upwards in
rates – increased by 26 bps during May-September 2022 the range of 10-30 bps for Q3:2022-23, after remaining
Chart IV.30: Surplus Liquidity, Credit Condition and Transmission to Term Deposit Rates
a: Credit Growth, Deposit Rate and Liquidity Conditions
b: Bank wise Transmission to Retail and Bulk c: Maturity wise Transmission to Fresh Term Deposit
Deposit Rates* (May to August 2022) Rates (May to August 2022)
*:Deposit rates are WADTDRs on fresh deposits.
Note: Data on median term deposit rate on fresh deposits pertain to the period May-September 2022.
Source: RBI.
14 The incremental credit-deposit ratio increased from 37 per cent on April 9, 2021 to 111.6 per cent on September 9, 2022.
15 Bulk deposits are single rupee term deposits of `2 crore and above for SCBs (excluding regional rural banks) and small finance banks.
16 Term deposits constituted 57.1 per cent of aggregate deposits of SCBs in June 2022, while current account and savings account deposits were 8.9 per
cent and 34 per cent, respectively.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
Table IV.7: Interest Rates on Small Savings Instruments
Small Savings Scheme Maturity Spread Average G-sec Formula based Government Difference
(years) (Percentage Yield (%) of Rate of Interest Announced Rate (basis points)
point) $ Corresponding (%) (applicable of Interest (%)
Maturity for Q3:2022-23) for Q3:2022-23
(Jun 2022 -Aug
2022)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (3) + (4) (6) (7) = (6) - (5)
Savings Deposit - - - - 4.00 -
Public Provident Fund 15 0.25 7.47 7.72 7.10 -62
Term Deposits
1 Year 1 0 6.09 6.09 5.50 -59
2 Year 2 0 6.33 6.33 5.70 -63
3 Year 3 0 6.57 6.57 5.80 -77
5 Year 5 0.25 7.04 7.29 6.70 -59
Recurring Deposit Account 5 0 6.57 6.57 5.80 -77
Monthly Income Scheme 5 0.25 7.00 7.25 6.70 -55
Kisan Vikas Patra 123 Months# 0 7.47 7.47 7.00 -47
NSC VIII issue 5 0.25 7.23 7.48 6.80 -68
Senior Citizens Saving Scheme 5 1.00 7.04 8.04 7.60 -44
Sukanya Samriddhi Account Scheme 21 0.75 7.47 8.22 7.60 -62
$: Spreads for fixing small saving rates as per Government of India Press Release of February 2016.
#: Current maturity is 123 months.
Note: Compounding frequency varies across instruments.
Sources: Government of India; FBIL; and RBI staff estimates.
unchanged for nine consecutive quarters. With G-sec framework of monetary policy. Moreover, it is also
yields moving higher, the prevailing interest rates a financial stability tool in addition to its role in
on various schemes are 44-77 bps below the formula liquidity management. The MSF rate was retained
implied rates for Q3: 2022-23 (Table IV.7). at 25 bps above the policy repo rate; thus, the width
of the LAF corridor was restored to its pre-pandemic
IV.3 Liquidity Conditions and the Operating
level of 50 bps and became symmetrical around the
Procedure
policy repo rate again. The FRRR was retained at 3.35
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act, 1934 requires per cent. Akin to the MSF, access to the SDF is at
the RBI to place the operating procedure relating to the discretion of banks, unlike repo/reverse repo,
the implementation of monetary policy and changes open market operation (OMO) and cash reserve ratio
thereto from time to time, if any, in the public (CRR) which are at the discretion of the RBI.
domain. In April 2022, significant changes in the
In H1:2022-23, the focus of liquidity management
operating procedure were instituted through the
moved to gradual, calibrated withdrawal of surplus
introduction of the SDF at 3.75 per cent – 25 bps
liquidity in a non-disruptive manner. This was in
below the policy repo rate (then prevailing at 4.00 sync with the shift in the focus of monetary policy
per cent) and 40 bps above the FRRR – as the floor of from remaining accommodative during 2021-22 to
the LAF corridor, replacing the FRRR. The SDF rate withdrawal of accommodation to contain inflationary
is applicable on uncollateralised overnight deposits. pressures and anchor inflation expectations. The MPC
By removing the binding collateral constraint on raised the policy repo rate by 140 bps during May-
the central bank, the SDF strengthens the operating August 2022. With the institution of the SDF at 40 bps

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
above the FRRR in April, the cumulative increase in the
Chart IV.31: CiC vis-à-vis Volume of Digital
effective interest rate was 180 bps. Furthermore, the Payments
CRR was increased by 50 bps to 4.50 per cent (effective
fortnight beginning May 21, 2022), withdrawing
primary liquidity from the banking system.
Drivers and Management of Liquidity
Surplus liquidity moderated in H1:2022-23, driven
by the public’s currency demand, net forex outflows
and the build-up in government’s cash balances. The
drainage of liquidity due to expansion in currency
in circulation (CiC) in H1 was lower than a year ago,
partly reflecting the growing use of digital payments
(Chart IV.31). The build-up of government cash
balances also contributed to the leakage of liquidity
*: Up to July 2022.
from the banking system. The drawdown by banks of Source: RBI.
their excess reserves partially ameliorated liquidity
pressures (Table IV.8). the average daily liquidity absorption under the
LAF fell from `7.8 lakh crore in April to `2.1 lakh
In terms of management of liquidity by the RBI,
crore in September (up to September 27). Due to
OMO sales and the increase in CRR by 50 bps sucked
out liquidity from the banking system in H1. The transient liquidity pressures on account of GST
consequent moderation in surplus liquidity was payments, the borrowing under the MSF window
reflected in lower absorptions under the LAF – rose to `59,312 crore (outstanding amount) on July
Table IV.8: Liquidity – Key Drivers and Management
(` crore)
2021-22 2022-23
Q1 Q2 H1 Q1 Q2*
Drivers
(i) CiC [withdrawal (-) /return (+)] -1,26,266 54,921 -71,344 -83,887 50,530
(ii) Net Forex Purchases (+)/ Sales (-) 1,60,843 1,42,395 3,03,238 16,159 -1,68,975#
(iii) GoI Cash Balances [build-up (-) / drawdown (+)] -2,23,740 -5,600 -2,29,340 -3,73,117 67,863#
(iv) Excess Reserves [build-up (-) / drawdown (+)] 1,17,219 -9,884 1,07,335 1,50,165 -48,559#
Management
(i) Net OMO Purchases (+)/ Sales (-) 1,38,965 97,960 2,36,925 -6,620 -14,460
(ii) Required Reserves [including both change in NDTL -87,827 -6,586 -94,463 -1,03,054 -10,463
and CRR]
Memo Item
Outstanding Net LAF as at the end of period 4,71,970 7,58,132 7,58,132 2,44,891 26,152^
*: Data are up to September 23, 2022; #: Data are up to July 29, 2022; ^: Data as on September 27, 2022.
Note: (+) / (-) sign suggests accretion/depletion in banking system liquidity.
Data on drivers and management pertain to the last Friday of the respective periods.
Source: RBI.

Chapter IV Financial Markets and Liquidity Conditions
25, 2022, – the highest since April 1, 2019 (`94,263 to September 27) while the remaining amount was
crore). Advance tax outflows and GST payments absorbed through variable rate reverse repo auctions
temporarily moderated surplus liquidity in the third (both main and fine-tuning operations) (Chart IV.32).
week of September. The RBI conducted variable rate In view of the moderation in surplus liquidity, banks
repo (VRR) auctions of `50,000 crore each of 3 days appetite to park funds with the Reserve Bank for longer
and overnight maturity on July 26 and September maturities waned. Consequently, the amount absorbed
22, 2022, respectively. The RBI remains vigilant on through the variable rate reverse repo auctions declined
the liquidity front and would conduct two-way fine- to 40 per cent of the total absorption in September 2022
tuning operations as necessary – both variable rate (up to September 27) from around 74 per cent in March
repo (VRR) and variable rate reverse repo (VRRR) 2022. The effective absorption rate17 at 5.25 per cent in
operations of different tenors – depending on the September 2022 (up to September 27) was higher than
evolving liquidity and financial conditions. the SDF rate of 5.15 per cent.
Since its inception on April 8, 2022, the monthly IV.4 Conclusion
average absorption under the SDF has been in the
Domestic financial markets have adjusted smoothly to
range of `1.2-2.7 lakh crore during H1:2022-23 (up
the shift in monetary policy’s focus on withdrawal of
accommodation, policy rate hikes and the moderation
Chart IV.32: Surplus Liquidity - Average in surplus liquidity, while exhibiting resilience to
Absorption under the LAF
global financial market headwinds and policy spillovers
from AEs. Market rates have moved higher across the
maturity spectrum albeit at varying degrees across
market segments and instruments. Bank credit offtake
has improved in line with economic activity, even as
lending and deposit rates have started moving higher.
The foreign exchange market has been characterised by
an orderly adjustment of the INR, with a depreciating
bias due to the generalised strength of the US dollar.
Going forward, the RBI will remain vigilant, agile and
nimble in its liquidity management operations and
would use all instruments at its disposal to mitigate
the spillovers of global financial market volatility on
*: Up to September 27, 2022.
Sources: RBI and RBI staff estimates. domestic financial markets.
17 The weighted average rate of absorptions under the FRRR/SDF and VRRR of longer maturities with the absorbed amount under each facility being the
weights.

V. External Environment
The global outlook has worsened under the combined impact of the protracted conflict in Ukraine, and aggressive
and synchronised monetary tightening. These developments are imparting sizeable volatility to global financial
markets and large adverse spillovers to emerging market economies. Supply chain disturbances, the energy and food
crises and tightening financial conditions are exacerbating risks of a global recession.
The global outlook has worsened since the April 2022 The Euro area’s GDP grew by 3.1 per cent (q-o-q
MPR under the combined impact of the protracted saar) in Q2:2022, its fastest pace in three quarters,
war, and aggressive and synchronised monetary boosted by the easing of COVID-19 restrictions and a
tightening to rein in multi-decadal highs in inflation. resurgence in tourism. High frequency indicators for
Sovereign bond yields have hardened while equity Q3, however, suggest slowdown in momentum due to
markets have corrected in response to monetary growing uncertainty surrounding future gas supplies
policy actions. Geopolitical tensions, the faster pace and the rising costs of living. The composite PMI
of monetary tightening by the US Fed, and the safe for the Euro zone registered its second consecutive
haven demand have led the US dollar to rally to 20- contraction in August 2022 at 48.9, with downturns
year highs, imposing depreciation pressures on the in both manufacturing and services. The outlook is
currencies of major emerging market economies overcast by the war and perniciously high inflation,
(EMEs) in an environment of large portfolio outflows. with expectations of tighter financial conditions going
Lingering supply chain disturbances, the energy and forward.
food crises and tightening financial conditions are
In the UK, GDP contracted by 0.3 per cent in Q2:2022
exacerbating risks of a global recession.
(q-o-q saar) due to a fall in government and consumer
V.1 Global Economic Conditions spending, deceleration in production output and
contraction in services constrained by labour
Global growth lost momentum in Q2:2022. High
shortages. The labour market remains tight with
frequency indicators point to a further slowdown
some early signs of weakening in labour demand. The
in Q3. The US economy contracted in H1:2022
composite PMI plummeted to 49.6 in August 2022,
[(-) 1.6 per cent and (-) 0.6 per cent in Q1 and
the first contraction in 18 months, driven by severe
Q2, respectively, in terms of quarter-on-quarter
downturn in manufacturing output and slowdown in
(q-o-q) seasonally adjusted annualised rates (saar)],
services business activity. The Bank of England (BoE)
dragged down by inventories and residential fixed
forecasts a decline in GDP in Q3:2022 till the end of
investment (Table V.1). In contrast, the US labour
2023 under the adverse impact of the sharp rise in
market remains robust, with sustained payroll gains
global energy and goods prices on UK households’ real
and a low unemployment rate. Nominal wage growth
disposable incomes.
has been strong, albeit with signs of levelling off. The
US composite Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI)1 at Japan’s GDP grew by 3.5 per cent (q-o-q saar) in
44.6 in August remained in contraction territory for Q2:2022 following a near stagnation in Q1 as
the second consecutive month, with declines in both private consumption accelerated with the lifting
manufacturing and services output. of COVID-19 curbs, and government spending rose
1 The references to PMIs are to S&P Global indices, unless specified otherwise.

Chapter V External Environment
for the second straight quarter. The employment
Table V.1: Real GDP Growth
and income situation improved moderately on the (Per cent)
whole, buoyed by accommodative monetary policy.
Country Q3- Q4- Q1- Q2- 2021 2022 2023
2021 2021 2022 2022 (P) (P)
The composite PMI (au Jibun Bank) dropped sharply
Quarter-on-quarter, seasonally adjusted annualised rate (q-o-q, saar)
to 49.4 in August 2022, the first contraction since
Canada 5.3 6.6 3.1 3.3
February, with both manufacturing and services
Euro area 9.0 2.0 2.7 3.1
companies recording a decline in output. The Bank
Japan -1.8 3.9 0.2 3.5
of Japan (BoJ) expects growth to be under pressure South Korea 0.9 5.5 2.6 3.0
UK 3.8 5.2 3.1 -0.3
stemming from elevated commodity prices though
US 2.7 7.0 -1.6 -0.6
the economy is projected to continue growing at a
Year-on-year
pace above its potential growth rate.
Advanced Economies
Amongst EMEs, China's GDP growth decelerated
Canada 3.8 3.2 2.9 4.6 4.5 3.4 1.8
sharply to 0.4 per cent (y-o-y) in Q2:2022 from 4.8 per Euro area 3.7 4.6 5.4 4.1 5.4 2.6 1.2
Japan 1.2 0.5 0.6 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.7
cent in Q1, marking the second-worst quarterly growth
South Korea 4.1 4.4 3.0 2.9 4.1 2.3 2.1
in 30 years (Table V.1). On q-o-q (annualised) basis,
UK 6.9 6.6 8.7 2.9 7.4 3.2 0.5
the economy contracted by 10 per cent in Q2:2022 as US 5.0 5.7 3.7 1.8 5.7 2.3 1.0
COVID-related lockdowns curbed economic activity Emerging Market Economies
amidst a steep downturn in the real estate sector and Brazil 4.0 1.7 1.7 3.2 4.6 1.7 1.1
an energy crunch. H1:2022 growth at 2.6 per cent China 4.9 4.0 4.8 0.4 8.1 3.3 4.6
India 8.4 5.4 4.1 13.5 8.7 7.4 6.1
(y-o-y) was below the 5.5 per cent annual growth target
Indonesia 3.5 5.0 5.0 5.4 3.7 5.3 5.2
for 2022. The composite PMI (Caixin) was at 53.0 in Philippines 7.0 7.8 8.2 7.4 5.7 6.7 5.0
August, driven by an expansion in services activity, Russia 4.0 5.0 3.5 -4.1 4.7 -6.0 -3.5
South Africa 3.0 1.7 2.7 0.2 4.9 2.3 1.4
offset by a marked slowdown in manufacturing growth.
Thailand -0.2 1.8 2.3 2.5 1.5 2.8 4.0
Looking ahead, the zero-COVID policy, strained power
Memo:
supply and the liquidity crisis in the real estate sector
World 2021 2022 (P) 2023 (P)
are likely to weigh on economic activity.
Year-on-year
Amongst other major EMEs, Brazil’s GDP growth rate
Output 6.1 3.2 2.9
accelerated to 3.2 per cent (y-o-y) in Q2:2022 from 1.7 Trade Volume 10.1 4.1 3.2
per cent in Q1, supported by private and government P: Projection.
Note: India's data correspond to fiscal year (April-March); e.g., 2021
spending, and investment. The unemployment rate
pertains to April 2021-March 2022.
fell to a multi-year low in June. The composite PMI Sources: Official statistical agencies; Bloomberg; IMF WEO Update, July
2022; and RBI staff estimates.
eased to 53.2 in August, with notable slowdown
evident in both the manufacturing and service 2022 from a 14-month high of 52.7 in July. Looking
sectors. Going forward, tight monetary conditions, ahead, COVID-19 infections risk due to low vaccination
high inflation and war-related uncertainty remain key levels, weak employment outlook and continued
risks to the growth outlook. South Africa’s GDP growth disruptions to power supply could weigh on economic
decelerated sharply to 0.2 per cent (y-o-y) in Q2 driven activity. The Russian economy contracted by 4.1 per
by the devastating floods in the KwaZulu-Natal region cent (y-o-y) in Q2:2022 due to the fallout from the
and power rationing hampering industrial activity. conflict with Ukraine and the impact of international
The composite PMI edged lower to 51.7 in August of sanctions. Consumer activity remains subdued, but

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Table V.2: Select Macroeconomic Indicators for BRICS2 Economies
Real GDP Growth Country 2021 2022(P) 2023(P) General Govt. Country 2021 2022(P) 2023(P)
Rate (Y-o-Y Per cent) Gross Debt
Brazil 4.6 1.7 1.1 (Per cent of GDP) Brazil# 93.0 91.9 92.8
Russia 4.7 -6.0 -3.5 Russia 17.0 16.8 18.9
India 8.7 7.4 6.1 India 86.8 86.9 86.6
China 8.1 3.3 4.6 China 73.3 77.8 81.8
South Africa 4.9 2.3 1.4 South Africa 69.1 70.2 73.4
CPI Inflation Rate Country 2021 2022(P) 2023(P) Current account Country 2021 2022(P) 2023(P)
(Per cent) balance (Per cent
Brazil 8.3 8.2 5.1 of GDP) Brazil -1.7 -1.5 -1.6
Russia 6.7 21.3 14.3 Russia 6.9 12.4 8.1
India 5.5 6.1 4.8 India -1.2 -2.9 -2.5
China 0.9 2.1 1.8 China 1.8 1.1 1.0
South Africa 4.5 5.7 4.6 South Africa 3.7 1.3 -1.0
General Govt. Net Country 2021 2022 (P) 2023(P) Forex Reserves* Country 2020 2021 2022
Lending/Borrowing (in US$ billion)
(Per cent of GDP) Brazil -4.4 -7.6 -7.4 Brazil 355.6 362.2 339.7
Russia 0.7 -4.0 -5.3 Russia 596.1 630.6 565.7
India -10.4 -9.9 -9.1 India 588.4 635.3 545.7
China -6.0 -7.7 -7.1 China 3536.0 3606.2 3454.4
South Africa -6.4 -5.8 -6.1 South Africa 54.2 57.8 59.6
P: Projection.
*: Forex reserves for 2022 pertains to August 2022 except China (July 2022), South Africa (July 2022) and India (September 16, 2022).
#: Gross debt refers to the nonfinancial public sector, excluding Eletrobras and Petrobras, and includes sovereign debt held by the central bank.
Note: India's data correspond to fiscal year (April-March).
Sources: Official statistical agencies; WEO April 2022 database and July 2022 Update, IMF; Fiscal Monitor Update, April 2022, IMF; and International
Reserve and Foreign Currency Liquidity (IRFCL), IMF.
it is beginning to recover, while investment is facing Amongst high frequency indicators, the OECD
the brunt of sanctions and capital outflows. Soaring composite leading indicators (CLIs) for August
energy prices have helped the external sector hold up 2022 remained below trend for most economies,
relatively well. The economy is expected to contract indicating a deteriorating outlook due to multi-
in both 2022 and 2023 due to the war and sanctions decadal high inflation, low consumer confidence
(Table V.2). and declining stock price indices (Chart V.1a). The
global composite PMI fell from 50.8 in July to 49.3
Growth in the ASEAN3 economies decelerated
in August, indicating a contraction in global output
in Q2:2022 as the war dampened demand. The
for the first time since June 2020, with fall in both
manufacturing PMI for these economies in August
services and manufacturing output (Chart V.1b).
signalled improvement in business conditions as
output and new orders expanded and employment The moderation in world trade, which started in
and purchasing activity increased. The slowdown the third quarter of 2021, accentuated in H1:2022
in China is a major source of risk to the region due owing to the war and slowdown in global growth
to spillovers from supply disruptions and weaker in a worsening macroeconomic environment
exports. (Chart V.2a). Reflecting this, the merchandise trade
2 BRICS includes Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa.
3 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) includes Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand,
Vietnam.

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.1: Survey Indicators
a: OECD CLI b: Composite PMI
Sources: OECD; and Bloomberg.
volume growth slowed from 4.6 per cent in Q1:2022 was, however, lower by 70.1 per cent from its peak
to 4.3 per cent in Q2:2022; however, it witnessed in October 2021, but remained above its pre-COVID
an uptick in July 2022. The WTO expects trade level (Chart V.2b).
volume growth to moderate to 3.0 per cent in 2022
V.2 Commodity Prices and Inflation
from 9.8 per cent in 2021. The Baltic Dry Index,
which measures shipping costs for a wide variety Global commodity prices have witnessed large
of bulk commodities such as coal and iron ore, swings since February following the war. Commodity
increased in September 2022 on sequential basis. It prices initially surged by 14.7 per cent (according
Chart V.2: World Trade Volume
a: World Trade Volume: Relative Contribution b: World Trade Volume and Baltic Dry Index
*: Data for Sep-22 are for Sep 1- 27, 2022.
Sources: CPB Netherlands; and CEIC.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
to the Bloomberg commodity price index) during Crude oil prices were highly volatile in H1:2022. They
March-May 2022 as the war started. Since then (June- hovered above US$100 per barrel between April and
September 28, 2022), the prices have corrected by July due to the war and sanctions related uncertainty
14.2 per cent as slowing global growth dampened in an environment of acutely tight supply conditions
demand. Notwithstanding this correction, the (Chart V.3c). Amidst extremely low inventories, the
Bloomberg commodity price index has gained 13.7 Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
per cent year to date (till September 28) (Chart (OPEC) plus countries continued with calibrated
V.3a). Global food prices, according to the Food and changes in production quotas. OPEC plus decided
Agriculture Organization (FAO), eased by 13.6 per to increase production by 100,000 barrels per day in
cent between March’s all-time record high and August August 2022 but in September, it decided to curtail
2022, as seasonal production gained and reduction in production by a similar magnitude starting October.
restrictive trade policies assuaged supply conditions. On the back of slowing global demand, strengthening
The index, however, increased by 3.2 per cent in US dollar and expectations on the availability of
2022 (up to August) (Chart V.3b). Iranians supplies, crude oil prices declined sharply
Chart V.3: Commodity Prices
a: Bloomberg Commodity Price Index b: Food Price Indices
c: Energy and Crude Oil Prices d: Metal Price Indices
Sources: FAO; World Bank; and Bloomberg.

Chapter V External Environment
during July-September 2022. Nevertheless, Brent
Table V.3: Consumer Price Inflation
crude prices have gained 15.0 per cent year to date
(Per cent)
(till September 28). Natural gas prices have jumped
Country Inflation Q3: Q4: Q1: Q2: July August
significantly since the war; in August 2022, the Target 2021 2021 2022 2022 2022 2022
prices (according to World Bank’s natural gas index) Advanced Economies
increased by 91.7 per cent in 2022 and remained 249.2
Canada 2.0 4.1 4.7 5.8 7.5 7.6 7.0
per cent higher on year-on-year basis. Euro area 2.0 2.9 4.7 6.1 8.0 8.9 9.1
Japan 2.0 -0.2 0.5 0.9 2.5 2.6 3.0
Base metal prices, measured by Bloomberg’s base South Korea 2.0 2.5 3.6 3.8 5.4 6.3 5.7
metal spot index, which rose by 17.1 per cent UK 2.0 2.8 4.9 6.2 9.2 10.1 9.9
US 2.0 5.4 6.7 8.0 8.7 8.5 8.3
on the back of the war, softened by 34.8 per cent
(4.3) (5.5) (6.3) (6.5) (6.3)
between April and September 2022 (up to September
Emerging Market Economies
28), reflecting a weak global outlook. Gold prices
Brazil 3.50 ± 1.5 9.6 10.5 10.7 11.9 10.1 8.7
plummeted markedly since April, hitting a low at
Russia 4.0 6.9 8.3 11.5 16.9 15.1 14.3
US$1,618 per troy ounce in September as bond yields India 4.0 ± 2.0 5.1 5.0 6.3 7.3 6.7 7.0
China 0.8 1.8 1.1 2.2 2.7 2.5
hardened and the US dollar traded stronger. For some
South Africa 3.0-6.0 4.8 5.5 5.8 6.6 7.8 7.6
metals like zinc and aluminium, production cuts
Mexico 3.0 ± 1.0 5.8 7.0 7.3 7.8 8.2 8.7
amidst high energy prices have lent support to prices Indonesia 3.0 ± 1.0 1.6 1.8 2.3 3.8 4.9 4.7
Philippines 3.0 ± 1.0 4.1 3.6 3.3 5.5 6.4 6.3
in August. In September, however, prices treaded the
Thailand 1.0-3.0 0.7 2.4 4.7 6.5 7.6 7.9
downward trajectory following other metal prices
Turkey 5.0 19.3 25.8 54.8 74.0 79.6 80.2
(Chart V.3d).
Notes: (1) Inflation for US is in terms of year-on-year change in consumer
price index with personal consumption expenditure price
Consumer Price Inflation
index year-on-year change in parentheses.
(2) The Bank of Canada aims to keep inflation at the 2 per cent
Consumer price inflation ratcheted up across
mid-point of an inflation control target range of 1-3 per cent.
economies due to sustained cost push pressures (3) Brazil’s inflation target for 2021 was 3.75 ± 1.5 per cent.
Sources: Central bank websites; and Bloomberg.
from elevated food and energy prices, rising wage
cost and lingering pandemic-induced supply chain
terms of the personal consumption expenditure (PCE)
bottlenecks as strong rebound in domestic demand
price index – the Federal Reserve (Fed)’s preferred
in a number of economies added to price pressures.
Headline inflation breached inflation targets across measure of inflation – moderated from 6.8 per cent
AEs and EMEs over the course of 2022 so far (Table in June to 6.3 per cent in July, driven by decrease in
V.3). High energy and food prices have been the prices of both goods and services. Core PCE inflation
major drivers of the upsurge in inflation, with goods eased to 4.6 per cent in July from 5.2 per cent in March
inflation generally much higher than services, though (Chart V.4a).
the latter has also started to gather pace recently.
In the Euro area, CPI inflation soared to a historic high
Core inflation is also ruling at elevated levels in
of 9.1 per cent in August 2022, prevailing well above
many economies due to the interplay of cost-push
the European Central Bank (ECB)’s target of 2 per cent
shocks and demand-pull pressures.
since July 2021. The precipitous increase in energy
In the US, headline CPI inflation reached a 40-year prices, especially of natural gas, along with food
high of 9.1 per cent in June 2022, driven by inflation prices, remained the major driver of inflation. Non-
in energy and food prices. It eased to 8.3 per cent in energy industrial goods, transportation and fertiliser
August due to a fall in gasoline prices. Inflation in costs have also fuelled price pressures. CPI inflation in

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
the UK rose to 10.1 per cent in July – the highest since China, CPI inflation has remained subdued, although
availability of data in January 1997 – and well above it accelerated during March-July 2022, mainly due to a
the BoE’s target of 2 per cent, led by housing and surge in food prices and a strong recovery in demand.
household services, transport and food. It moderated In August, however, it moderated to 2.5 per cent as
marginally to 9.9 per cent in August as transport both food and non-food indices eased.
sub-index declined. In Japan, CPI inflation in all items
V.3 Monetary Policy Stance
less fresh food – the Bank of Japan’s target measure –
With inflation rates at their highest in decades and
rose to 2.8 per cent in August, the highest in 7 years.
It has breached the 2 per cent target since April 2022. significantly above targets, central banks in AEs and
CPI inflation also rose to 3.0 per cent in August 2022 EMEs resorted to aggressive monetary tightening
from 2.6 per cent in July, amidst surging fuel and food with larger-than-usual rate hikes in 2022 to contain
costs as well as a sharply weakening yen. inflation and anchor inflation expectations even as
economic activity is losing momentum. A number of
Like the AEs, inflation in major EMEs remains elevated
central banks in EMEs were already in a tightening
and well above their respective targets. In Brazil, CPI
mode in 2021. The synchronised monetary tightening
inflation was 8.7 per cent in August 2022 (Chart V.4b).
has raised concerns as to whether it will lead to a
In Russia, inflation peaked at 17.8 per cent in April
recession or whether the central banks will be able to
from 9.2 per cent in February following sanctions and
achieve a soft landing (Box V.1).
a sharp depreciation of the rouble. It has since then
moderated gradually to 14.3 per cent in August, partly After initiating the tightening cycle in March 2022, the
due to currency appreciation. In South Africa, CPI US Fed has delivered rate hikes in all its subsequent
inflation stood at 7.6 per cent in August – exceeding the policy meetings. In May, the US Fed effected a 50 bps
central bank’s target range since May 2022 – as prices increase in the federal funds rate. It followed up with
of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased. In 75 bps hikes in its June, July and September meetings –
Chart V.4: CPI Inflation – Select Economies
a: Advanced Economies b: Emerging Market Economies
Sources: Official statistical agencies; and Bloomberg.

Chapter V External Environment
Box V.1: High Inflation and Aggressive Monetary Tightening: Soft or Hard Landing?
With inflation rates ruling at their highest since the 1970s At the current juncture, inflation is running high while
and 1980s in major economies and substantially above GDP growth is slowing even as unemployment rates
targets, central banks have stepped up the pace and the remain low. This macroeconomic mix raises the odds of
quantum of rate hikes to keep inflation expectations hard landing.
anchored and to bring inflation back to targets. This has
Table V.I.1: Macroeconomic Factors —
raised growing concerns that the synchronised monetary
Hard and Soft Landings
tightening could land the global economy into a recession
Variables Advanced Emerging Market
(a hard landing). Central banks hope that they would be
Economies Economies
able to engineer a soft landing (with only a loss of pace in Soft Hard Soft Hard
landings landings landings landings
growth rather than an outright contraction in economic
Conditions Inflation (%) 1.5*** 2.2*** 4.0** 4.9**
activity) (BIS, 2022; Blinder, 2022). at the start
of the GDP growth (%) 3.3* 2.5* 3.1* 4.4*
A panel analysis of 8 countries with 23 tightening tightening Real policy rate (%) 3.5*** 0.0*** 2.3*** 4.2***
cycle5
cycles over the period Q1:1997-Q2:2022 suggests that Change in household 0.7 0.5 -0.7* 0.1*
credit-to-GDP (% pts)6
for both AEs and EMEs, hard landings are preceded by
Fiscal deficit-to-GDP -1.6 -3.1 -1.5 -2.2
significantly higher average inflation as compared to soft (% pts)
Debt-to-GDP (% pts) 37.4 56.0 37.9 48.9
landings4 (Table V.I.1). Low GDP growth in the period
Conditions Real policy rate -0.1 2.0 1.2 0.6
prior to the start of tightening increases the probability
during increase (% pts)
tightening
of a hard landing in AEs. In EMEs, high GDP growth in Average quarterly real 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0
rate increase (% pts)
conjunction with high inflation tilts the scales towards
Tightening duration 6.0 10.3 5.2 6.4
hard landing. For EMEs, elevated fiscal deficits and public (quarters)
debt prior to the start of monetary tightening increase Note: ***,**,* denote level of significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively, for
testing equality of means between hard and soft landings using Student’s t test.
the risk of them ending in recession post the tightening. Sources: BIS; Bloomberg; IMF and RBI staff estimates.
References:
A formal panel logit regression for the sample of AEs and
EMEs indicates that the probability of a hard landing Bank for International Settlements (2022), BIS Annual
increases if the tightening is preceded by high inflation, Economic Report 2022 (Box 1 C: “How Likely is a Soft
high GDP growth and higher increase in credit/GDP Landing?”).
ratio; higher real policy rates prior to the start of the Blinder, A., (2022) “On Landings Hard and Soft: The
tightening episode, on the other hand, appear to reduce Fed, 1965-2020”, Lecture at Markus’ Academy, February,
the probability of a hard landing by mitigating the build- available at https://bcf.princeton.edu/events/alan-blinder-
up of financial excesses (eq. 1). on-landings-hard-and-soft-the-fed-1965-2020/.
Probability (Hard landing) = -3.99 + 0.31 CPI +0.30 GDP – 0.15 RPR + 1.34 Credit
t t-1 t-1 t-1 t-1 ................ (1)
(0.000) (0.004) (0.056) (0.021) (0.100)
CPI, GDP, RPR and Credit refer to 4-quarter averages of consumer price inflation, real GDP growth, real policy rate and change in credit/GDP ratio,
respectively. Figures in parentheses are p-values.
Source: RBI staff estimates.
4 Hard landing for the purpose of this analysis is negative GDP growth rate (y-o-y) for 2 or more successive quarters for AEs; for EMEs, it is a fall in GDP
growth rate by 60 per cent (or more) for 2 or more successive quarters from the average GDP growth rate over the sample period. A soft landing, on the
other hand, is a scenario of no recession within three years of a tightening cycle in which the policy rate is raised for at least three successive quarters
and peaks.
5 One year prior to the start of the tightening cycle.
6 Average quarterly change in credit growth during one year preceding the tightening cycle.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
a cumulative hike of 300 bps in the current tightening raised their policy rates by 175 bps and 150 bps,
phase. It also unveiled plans for quantitative tightening respectively in 2022 while the Central Bank of Iceland
to reduce its balance sheet by US$ 47.5 billion per and the Czech National Bank effected cumulative
month during June-August and US$ 95 billion per hikes of 350 bps and 325 bps, respectively (Chart V.5a).
month from September. According to the Summary Sveriges Riksbank (Sweden) has increased the policy
of Economic Projections released in September 2022, rate by 175 bps in 2022 so far, including 100 bps hike
the median federal funds rate is seen at 4.4 per cent by in September 2022. Amongst the AEs, the Bank of
end–2022 and 4.6 per cent by end-2023. Japan (BoJ) remained an outlier as it maintained an
accommodative stance and kept the monetary policy
Amidst raging inflationary pressures, the ECB in
parameters – key policy rates and the quantum of
its June 2022 meeting decided to end net asset
asset purchases – unchanged in 2022 so far.
purchases under the Asset Purchase Programme
(APP) as of July 1, 2022 while continuing to reinvest Amongst EMEs, the People’s Bank of China (PBoC)
maturing securities under its Pandemic Emergency adopted an accommodative monetary policy stance
Purchase Programme (PEPP) until atleast the end of effecting 25 bps and 50 bps cuts in the reserve
2024. The ECB undertook frontloaded rate hikes of requirement ratio for most banks and smaller banks,
50 bps in July and 75 bps in September in response respectively, from April 25, 2022, which injected 530
to soaring inflation. Continuing with the tightening billion yuan into the economy. It reduced the 1-year
cycle that started in December 2021, the Bank of Loan Prime Rate (LPR) by 5 bps in August, the 5-year
England (BoE) raised its policy rate in the May and LPR by 15 bps and the 1-year medium-term lending
June 2022 meetings by 25 bps each followed by 50 bps facility loans and 7-day reverse repurchase agreements
in August and September each which took the Bank by 10 bps each.
Rate to 2.25 per cent. Simultaneously, in September,
In contrast, most other EME central banks continued
the committee unanimously voted to reduce around
with policy tightening. Amongst BRICS, the Banco
£80 billion in its stock of gilts over twelve months7.
Central do Brasil followed up on its 100 bps rate
Alongside the start of the gilt sales programme, the
hike action of March with a 100 bps rate hike in May
BoE also decided to launch a new Short Term Repo
and 50 bps rate hikes each in June and August. It,
(STR) facility to help ensure that short-term market
however, paused its tightening cycle in its September
rates remain close to the Bank Rate.
meeting. The South African Reserve Bank raised
Other major AEs have also started unwinding its policy rate by 50 bps in its May meeting and by
their pandemic-led stimulus and normalising their 75 bps in both its July and September meetings
monetary conditions. The Bank of Canada has raised (Chart V.5b). Amongst Asian EMEs, the Bank of
its policy rate by 275 bps since April – 50 bps each in Thailand and the Bank Indonesia embarked on a
April and June, 100 bps in July and 75 bps in September, tightening cycle by hiking 25 bps each in August 2022,
along with quantitative tightening to maintain price followed by a hike of 25 bps and 50 bps, respectively,
stability. The Reserve Bank of Australia has increased in September. In Latin America, the central banks
its cash rate target by 225 bps since May – 25 bps in of Mexico, Chile and Peru continued with monetary
May and by 50 bps each in June, July, August and tightening. Amongst European EMEs, Hungary has
September. The Norges Bank and the Bank of Korea
7 In light of the significant re-pricing of UK and global financial assets, the BoE announced on September 28 that it would carry out temporary purchases
of long-dated UK government bonds on whatever scale necessary to restore orderly market conditions. Concomitantly, the BoE decided to postpone the
planned gilt sales under £80 billion stock reduction programme, that were due to commence in early October, to October 31.

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.5: Policy Rate Changes – Select Major Economies
a: Advanced Economies b: Emerging Market Economies
Source: Bloomberg.
cumulatively increased the policy rate by 860 bps V.4 Global Financial Markets
since April, including 200 bps in an off-cycle meeting
Global financial markets remained nervous during
in July.
April-September as they grappled with protracted
The Bank of Russia switched gears in H1 as price and geopolitical tensions, the highest inflation rates in
financial stability risks subsided. It had increased its decades in many economies, aggressive monetary
key rate by 11.5 percentage points in February 2022 tightening and global recession concerns. Bond yields
in two steps to stem depreciation and inflationary have firmed, equity markets have corrected and the
pressures amidst the geopolitical upheaval. As US dollar has surged on hawkish Fed statements and
depreciation pressures waned, it cut its policy rate by safe haven demand while EME currencies broadly
12.50 percentage points since April – including by 300 weakened.
bps each in two off-cycle meetings held in April and
In equity markets, the US S&P index plunged beginning
May, thus offsetting the rate hikes in February. The
April 2022 as uncertainty regarding the pace of
central bank of Turkey cut its key policy rate by 100
unwinding by the US Fed along with mounting growth
bps each in August and September meetings, even as
concerns rattled investor sentiments. The short-lived
inflation skyrocketed to 80.2 per cent in August.
rebound in the first half of June was reversed by
Overall, during 2022, central banks’ rate hikes have September on account of the large rate hikes by the
been quite aggressive by historical standards. In a Fed. With some dissipation in uncertainty and falling
sample of 31 central banks (13 AEs and 18 EMEs) that inflation expectations, US equities gradually rebounded
raised their policy rates in 2022 (till September 28, in July but shed gains in August and September as the
2022), 23 central banks have raised their policy rates Fed continued with its aggressive rate hikes. Overall,
by 75 bps or more. Out of these, 8 central banks raised the US S&P index fell by 17.9 per cent between end-
rates by more than 100 bps. March 2022 and September 28, 2022.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
Chart V.6: Equity Markets
a: Equity Indices (MSCI) b: Change in Equity Indices
Sources: Bloomberg; and RBI staff estimates.
European stock markets broadly mirrored the US of higher rate hikes. Recession concerns pulled
markets, inching down in April and May on account down long-term bond yields in July, but yields edged
of mounting recession fears and worries over higher during August-September on expectations
surging bond yields. After a short reversal in late- of further monetary tightening. In April, the US 10-
May and early-June, markets have been weighed year treasury yield raced up to a 3-year high as the
down by rising inflation fears, soaring energy prices, market priced in more aggressive Fed tightening
gloomy business activity data and larger rate hikes
than previously anticipated. With short-term rates
by the ECB. The UK stock indices also tracked
also rising sharply, the yield curve became flatter.
global cues. The Japanese market outperformed its
As the growth outlook dimmed and recessionary
peers on stable inflation and the continuation of
fears rose, the short end of the yield curve hardened
ultra-accommodative monetary policy to support
while long-term yields softened, causing yield curve
economic recovery. However, it fell to a 3-month low
inversion in July. The US 10-year yield, however,
in September 28, 2022.
hardened again in August-September with stronger-
EME stock markets underperformed developed than-expected payrolls data, hawkish commentary
markets in Q2:2022 as growing inflationary pressures, from the Fed Chair and FOMC members and third
recession fears, and monetary tightening in the major consecutive 75 bps rate hike by the Fed (Chart V.7a).
AEs impacted investors’ sentiments (Chart V.6a). In The UK and German 10-year bond yields tracked the
Q3:2022, stock markets, especially for EMEs, posted
US markets. The UK 10-year bond yield shot up by
negative returns with Brazil and India being exceptions.
70 bps in the week ending September 28, on account
The dash for safe haven led to portfolio outflows and
of expansionary fiscal policy involving sweeping tax
downward pressures on equities (Chart V.6b).
cuts. Differing from peers, Japanese bond yields were
Sovereign bond yields across major AEs hardened in range bound, given the continued accommodative
Q2 and Q3 over surging inflation and expectations monetary policy stance. However, the 10-year yields

Chapter V External Environment
Chart V.7: Bond Yields
a: 10-year Sovereign Bond Yields in Select AEs b: 10-year Sovereign Bond Yields in Select EMEs
Source: Bloomberg.
hit the upper limit of the BoJ’s implicit band around tightening as well as global cues (Chart V.7b). Chinese
its 0 per cent target in September on account of sharp and Brazilian bond yields, however, softened
rise in inflation and capital outflows, prompting BoJ modestly on their monetary policy actions.
to buy more bonds than planned.
In the currency markets, the US dollar strengthened
Bond yields in major EMEs have moved with a further against major global peers in Q2:2022
hardening bias driven by domestic monetary and Q3, reflecting the faster pace of rate hikes
Chart V.8: Currency Movements and Capital Flows
a: Currency Indices b: Portfolio Flows to EMEs
Note: The data for portfolio flows to EMEs is weekly.
Sources: Bloomberg; and IIF.

Monetary Policy Report September 2022
and quantitative tightening plans relative to other V.5 Conclusion
major AEs (Chart V.8a). Rising safe haven demand
The risks to the global growth outlook are
amidst the ongoing geopolitical upheaval and
overwhelmingly tilted to the downside as monetary
soaring energy prices have further strengthened the
authorities undertake aggressive tightening to rein
US dollar. The US dollar’s strength was mirrored
in the weakening of EME currencies amidst ebbing in high inflation. The uncertainty around the war
investor interest. Capital outflows during March-July and the pace of monetary tightening going ahead
exacerbated the volatility in EME currencies. Capital are imparting sizeable volatility to global financial
flows resumed in August but the trend reversed in markets, while also lending safe haven demand to the
September led by equity outflows (Chart V.8b). The US dollar. These developments are generating large
MSCI Emerging Market Currency Index declined adverse spillovers to emerging market economies
by 4.4 per cent in Q2:2022 and by 5.4 per cent in and posing sizeable downside risks to their growth
Q3:2022 (up to September 28, 2022). prospects.